APPLIED BEHAVIOUR
ANALYSIS & AUTISM:
AN INTRODUCTIONLONDON
PUBLISHED WITH PERMISSIONSuzanne M. Buchanan 
Psy.D., BCBA-D
Mary Jane Weiss
Ph.D., BCBA-DFirst Bridge Centre is a fresh start for ABA in the UK. We promise a new beginning 
for families who live with early years ASD without a clear sense of choice. Led by the 
science, defined by results our only care is the best care for each child we support.
Our vision
Every child born with autism should benefit from urgent attention, dedicated
intensive care and the chance to grow and live their best life. Every family should 
know what’s possible with early evidence-based treatment.
Published in the UK with permission. Copyright 2020 First Bridge CentreContents
Motivation  
Reinforcement
Shaping
Prompts
Modeling  (Imitation Training)
Discrete Trial Instruction
Verbal Behavior
Natural Environment Training
Picture Exchange Communication System
Incidental Teaching
Pivotal Response Training
Task Analysis and Chaining
Token Economy
Activity Schedules
Precision Teaching with Rate-Building 
Functional Assessment and Analysis
Antecedent-Based Interventions
Positive Behavior Support
Generalization and Maintenance1
3
7
9
10
11
12
14
16
17
18
20
23
25
26
27
28
30
32
33
34
36
39
41
43
45
45
46
47
49
51
52
55
57
61
63
64
69Forward
Introduction: Why ABA?
What is ABA?
How Behavior Analysts Approach Teaching  
        ABCs of Behavior
What Principles and Methods Comprise ABA?
Evaluation of ABA Programs
  
Running an Intensive ABA Program
ABA and the Family
ABA as a Profession
Myths & Facts
Summary 
Resource Section
References
Give Us Your FeedbackData collection and analysis 
Demonstrating a functional relation 
Siblings
Running a Home-Based ABA ProgramForward
Both authors have been profoundly touched by many individuals with autism and 
their families. We have partnered with parents to teach their children and learned 
from the challenges and joys they experienced while raising a child with autism. 
Many of these parents consistently requested a written overview that deﬁned and 
described methods used within Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) programming. 
Parents wanted this information during their initial search to better understand 
this treatment approach, and during their journey to increase their knowledge and 
abilities. Unfortunately, only a few such publications have met this need and they 
cover slightly different topics. 
This book is intended for those parents and professionals who want an overview of 
Applied Behavior Analysis and the meaningful changes it can make in the lives of 
people with autism. The book is divided into brief segments that focus on speciﬁc 
topics. Within each section, readers can expect a description or deﬁnition of the 
topic, examples from everyday settings, and references for further information. 
References are largely drawn from the professional literature with an emphasis on 
those that have a high degree of scientiﬁc validity. We hope this book is helpful to you 
and we welcome your feedback for future revisions.
It is important to emphasize that this book is an overview and the resources listed 
in each section and at the end should be referred to for a more comprehensive 
understanding of the discussed topics.
The authors gratefully acknowledge the peer review of Dr. Sandra Harris and the 
contributions of Tamara Bannon, Jenna Miller, Rebecca Hernandez, and Chigusa 
Weekley to this manuscript.
Suggested citation: Buchanan, S. M., & Weiss, M. J. (2010). Applied behavior 
analysis and autism: An introduction. Robbinsville, NJ: Autism New Jersey.3Why ABA?
Glossary
Introduction
There are many autism treatments available, 
and most of them claim promising results.  
How do you know if these claims are true?  Is 
there concrete evidence that the treatment 
works?   Choosing the right treatment is in 
the best interest of your child and should be 
worth the commitment and resources. So the 
question is: why ABA?
There are many anecdotes that appear to 
support numerous treatments. ABA stands 
out because its foundation is the collection 
and review of direct observational data. 
There have been hundreds of well-controlled 
studies published in the professional 
literature documenting ABA’s effectiveness 
with learners with autism (Matson et al., 
1996). Most of these studies have focused 
on one or two speciﬁc behaviors that 
required intensive teaching or treatment. 
Some have focused on the learners’ behavior 
as well as the therapists’ and the parents’ 
behavior during academic and social 
interactions. Approximately ten studies have 
explored the long-term effects of intensive ABA programming for young children 
with autism. The results of these studies 
challenged previous notions that people with 
autism could not be educated or that they 
could not lead meaningful and independent 
lives. The children who participated in early 
and intensive ABA programming learned 
many new skills and substantially reduced 
their problematic behavior. Some of these 
children learned so much that today it is hard 
to tell them apart from typically developing 
children. 
While there is still much to learn about 
how early behavioral intervention affects 
young children with autism, there are 
some powerful messages from the studies 
conducted so far (Green, 1996). Several 
state and federal agencies have heard these 
powerful messages and agree that there is 
solid evidence that early and intensive ABA 
intervention can produce comprehensive 
and meaningful improvements for a large 
proportion of children with autism (for 
example, Maine Administrators of Services for Children with Disabilities (MADSEC) 
Autism Taskforce, 1999; New York 
State Department of Health, 1999; U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, 
1999). 
Additionally, the United States Congress 
commissioned a panel of autism experts to 
publish a state of the research on autism and 
provide recommendations for public policy 
and future research (National Research 
Council, 2001). While they recognized the 
contribution of a behavior-based approach in 
autism treatment, they pointed out the lack 
of comparison studies of among this and 
other popular treatments. The results from 
this type of study would shed more deﬁnitive 
light on the question of which treatment was 
the best. They stressed the importance of 
conducting studies that directly compared 
interventions so that educators and parents 
could select the most effective treatment for 
an individual with autism. Since then, two 
comparison studies have been published in 
peer-reviewed journals. While there are limits 
to how much information can be gleaned 
from only two studies (described below), the 
results tells us more about the effectiveness 
of ABA. 
How does ABA compare to other treatments? 
Howard, Sparkman, Cohen, Green, & 
Stainslaw (2005) published a study on 
the effects of three different treatment 
approaches used within early intervention. 
Sixty-one young children with autism 
spectrum disorders received one of three 
treatment procedures: a) intensive behavior 
analytic intervention, b) intensive eclectic 
intervention which was a combination 
of popular methods, or c) non-intensive 
public early intervention.  The children were 
an average of 34 months old when they 
entered the study. The study measured each 
child’s skills before and after a 14-month 
intervention in the areas of: a) cognitive, 
b) non-verbal, c) receptive/expressive 
language, and d) adaptive skills.  The results of this study showed that children in an 
intensive ABA program produced signiﬁcant 
improvement across all four areas compared 
to the children who received eclectic and 
non-intensive treatments.  The study even 
found that the children who received 
non-intensive early intervention showed a 
regression.  
What about children with autism who enter 
treatment at a later age? There is some 
evidence that these children also beneﬁt 
substantially from ABA instruction when 
compared to children who participated 
in other interventions of similar intensity 
(Eikeseth, Smith, Jahr, & Eldevik, 2002). 
The researchers examined the progress 
of 25 4-7 year olds who received either 
intensive behavioral treatment or intensive 
eclectic treatment in public school settings. 
The results indicated that children who 
participated in intensive behavioral treatment 
made large improvements across all 
measured skill areas (i.e., cognitive, visual-
spatial, language, and adaptive behavior 
skills) as compared to those children who 
received intensive eclectic treatment.  
The same is likely to be true for adults with 
autism. While there are well-documented 
effects of behavioral assessment and 
intervention strategies on improved 
functioning for adults with autism 
(McClannahan, MacDuff, & Krantz, 2002), 
there are limited long-term data on intensive 
programs for adults. However, it is clear that 
many adults experience real and substantial 
gains come from ABA intervention.  Thus, it 
stands to reason that ABA remains a central 
and effective component of services for 
individuals of all ages with autism.  
Early and intensive ABA programming is 
cost effective and potentially life changing 
for individuals and their families (Jacobson, 
Mulick, & Green, 1998). Why not turn to 
science and get the best available treatment?  
When you review the results of the research, 
you will ﬁnd ABA.  
Introduction 4Celiberti, D. A., Buchanan, S. M., Bleeker, 
F. N., Kreiss, D. S., & Rosenfeld, D. (2004). 
The road less traveled: Charting a clear 
course for autism treatment. Autism: 
Basic Information (5th ed., pp. 17-32). 
Robbinsville, NJ: Autism New Jersey.
Eikeseth, S., Smith, T., Jahr, E., & Eldevik, 
S. (2002). Intensive behavioral treatment 
at school for 4- to 7-year-old children with 
autism: A 1-year comparison controlled 
study. Behavior Modiﬁcation, 26, 49-68.
Green, G. (1996). Early behavioral 
intervention for autism: What does research 
tell us? In C. Maurice (Ed), G. Green, & S. 
C. Luce (Co-eds.). Behavioral intervention 
for young children with autism: A manual 
for parents and professionals (pp. 29-44). 
Austin, TX: PRO-ED.
Howard, J. S., Sparkman, C. R., Cohen, 
H. G., Green, G., & Stainslaw, H. (2005). 
Comparison of intensive behavior analytic 
and eclectic treatments for young children 
with autism. Research in Developmental 
Disabilities, 26, 359-383.
Jacobson, J. W., Mulick, J. A., & Green, 
G. (1998). Cost-beneﬁt estimates for early 
intensive behavioral intervention for young 
children with autism--general model and 
single state case. Behavioral Interventions, 
13, 201-226.
MADSEC Autism Taskforce. (1999). 
Executive summary. Portland, ME: 
Department of Education.Resources
Matson, J. L., Benavidez, D.  A., 
Compton, L. S., Paclawskyj, T., & Baglio, 
C. (1996). Behavioral treatment of 
autistic persons: A review of research 
from 1980 to the present. Research in 
Developmental Disabilities, 17, 433-465. 
McClannahan, L. E., MacDuff, G. S., 
& Krantz, P. (2002). Behavior analysis 
and intervention for adults with autism. 
Behavior Modiﬁcation, 26, 9-26.
National Research Council (2001). 
Educating children with autism. 
Committee on Educational Interventions 
for Children with Autism. C. Lord & J. 
P. McGee (Eds.) Division of Behavioral 
and Social Sciences and Education. 
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
New York State Department of Health 
Early Intervention Program. (1999). 
Clinical practice guidelines: The guideline 
technical report – Autism/pervasive 
developmental disorders, assessment and 
intervention. Albany, NY: New York State 
Department of Health.
U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services. (1999). Mental health: A report 
of the surgeon general. Rockville, MD: 
U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, Substance Abuse and Mental 
Health Services Administration, Center for 
Mental Health Services, National Institutes 
of Health, National Institute of Mental 
Health.
Introduction 5ABA makes meaningful changes in people’s 
lives through the use of procedures that 
have been demonstrated to work. The 
following description of ABA was adapted 
from Green (1996).
Behavior analytic treatment for autism 
uses reinforcement in structured and 
natural environments to help individuals 
learn new skills. Skills ranging from simple 
to complex are broken down into small, 
measurable units and systematically 
taught. A high-priority goal is making it 
enjoyable for the learner. Through carefully 
planned guidance and reinforcement, the 
learner is more likely to exhibit appropriate 
behavior during and after the teaching 
interaction. In contrast, problem behaviors 
are not reinforced. Some analysis may be 
necessary to determine the function(s) and 
reinforcers for these behaviors to develop 
an effective intervention plan.What is ABA?
On a more technical note, Cooper, Heron, 
and Heward (1987) deﬁne ABA as:
the science in which procedures 
derived from the principles of behavior 
are systematically applied to improve 
socially signiﬁcant behavior to a 
meaningful degree and to demonstrate 
experimentally that the procedures 
employed were responsible for the 
improvement in behavior. (p. 14) 
As we said above, ABA makes meaningful 
changes in people’s lives through the use of 
procedures that have been demonstrated to 
work.
During the last ﬁfty years, Behavior 
Analysis has been referred to in a number 
of different terms, including behavior 
modiﬁcation, behavior management, 
contingency management, positive 
approaches, and operant or Skinnerian 
7psychology. Most of these terms fail to 
fully capture the nature and dimensions 
of contemporary behavior analysis, and 
bring with them associations that are either 
inaccurate or misleading. Here is some 
accurate information. Behavior Analysis has two main branches: experimental 
and applied. The experimental analysis of 
behavior is a ﬁeld of study in which animals 
and humans participate in experiments 
and researchers observe how they behave 
and learn in different situations. The results 
of these studies are then used to inform 
Applied Behavior Analysis, ABA, which is 
the service part of the discipline. In other 
words, this type of behavior analyst works 
with people to improve their behavior and 
quality of life. 
ABA programs are based on empirical 
research, include the direct observation 
and measurement of behavior, and 
utilize antecedent stimuli, positive 
reinforcement, and other consequences 
to produce behavior change. ABA is a 
well-developed discipline among the 
human service professions. It has a 
mature body of knowledge, established 
standards for practice, distinct methods 
of service, recognized experience and 
educational requirements for practice, and 
identiﬁed sources of requisite education in 
universities. 
Additional Resources
These two resources describe the 
characteristics of Applied Behavior Analysis. 
While they do not contain information speciﬁc 
to autism, they are quite relevant and provide 
an accurate and thorough picture of the 
concepts that guide the ﬁeld.
Baer, D. M., Wolf, M. M., & Risley, T. R. 
(1968). Some dimensions of applied behavior 
analysis. Journal of Applied Behavior 
Analysis, 1, 91-97.
Baer, D. M., Wolf, M. M., & Risley, T. R. 
(1987). Some still-current dimensions of 
applied behavior analysis. Journal of Applied 
Behavior Analysis, 20, 313-327. Resources
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, 
W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis 
(2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall.
Green, G. (1996). Early behavioral 
intervention for autism: What does 
research tell us? In C. Maurice (Ed.), G. 
Green, & S. Luce (Co-eds.). Behavioral 
intervention for young children with 
autism: A manual for parents and 
professionals (pp. 29-44). Austin, TX: 
PRO-ED.
Newman, B. (1999). When everybody 
cares: Case studies of ABA with people 
with autism. NY: Dove and Orca.
Newman, B., Reeve, K. F., Reeve, S. A., 
& Ryan, C. S. (2003). Behaviorspeak: 
Glossary of terms in applied behavior 
analysis (ABA). NY: Dove & Orca.
Newman, B., Reinicke, D., & Newman, 
L. (2000). Words from those who care: 
Further case studies of ABA with people 
with autism. NY: Dove and Orca.
What is ABA? 8The behavioral teaching approach takes 
into account a few factors, such as the 
student’s current level of performance, the 
skill acquisition and behavior reduction 
goals, and some assumptions about what 
causes behavior (performance) to occur. 
ABA views the immediate present as the 
key to comprehending current behavior, 
and uses information about the past 
cautiously (for example, to understand how 
a behavioral pattern developed over time). 
Causes of Behavior
1. Genetic explanations - With the human 
genome project complete, we now 
know more about how genes affect 
behavior. Unfortunately, this information 
is not yet helpful in producing a 
medical treatment or cure for autism. 
2. Past experiences (sometimes called 
reinforcement history or learning 
history) – Behavior analysts study how 
behaviors are acquired and maintained 
through reinforcement. While it is 
important to understand a person’s How Behavior Analysts 
Approach Teaching
history of experiences, this source 
may yield only limited and insufﬁcient 
information about how to increase a 
person’s behavioral skills.
3. Immediate environment – the events 
that are happening during every 
moment of our lives. This includes the 
setting, other people present and their 
behavior, objects, activities, routines, 
resources, etc. Behavior analysts see 
the immediate environment as the 
major cause of behavior. They collect 
very speciﬁc information about what 
happens before and after a behavior. 
They then use this information to 
make appropriate behavior more 
likely and inappropriate behavior less 
likely. Parents and teachers can have 
a tremendous impact on behavior 
because they are such a large part of 
the child’s immediate environment. So, 
the more you know about maximizing 
learning, the more you can change a 
person’s behavior.
9Let’s look more closely at how behavior 
analysts study the interaction between the 
immediate environment and behavior.
One of the main things that behavior 
analysts do is examine the ABCs: 
Antecedents, Behavior, and 
Consequences. 
Antecedent: what comes before a 
speciﬁc behavior 
Behavior: the behavior itself
Consequence: what happens after a 
speciﬁc behavior
This analysis helps to pinpoint 
what may trigger a behavior 
and assists in identifying what 
consequences keep a behavior 
going.
Example: Teaching Exchange
Teacher says, “Get your lunchbox. It’s time 
to eat.” (Antecedent)
Student walks to cubby, gets lunchbox, 
walks to seat at table, and sits down. 
(Behavior)
Teacher says, “Terriﬁc work, Johnny.  You 
got your lunchbox.  You’re ready to eat.” 
(Consequence)
A
B
C
10Both the antecedent (the instruction) and 
the consequence (eating lunch) inﬂuence 
whether the behavior will happen again.
Example: Challenging Behavior
Teacher says, “Let’s clean up.  It is time for 
circle.” (Antecedent)
Student throws blocks, lies on ﬂoor, and 
screams. (Behavior)
Teacher says, “We need to 
clean up our toys,” and helps 
child to put blocks in the box. 
(Consequence)
Both the antecedent (the 
instruction) and the consequence (not 
allowed to continue playing) inﬂuence 
whether the behavior will happen again.
In real situations, other factors such as the 
learner’s motivation and setting events are 
taken into account. These simple examples 
are presented for illustration purposes of 
the ABC analysis.
What does this mean for me?
We can understand how and when 
behaviors occur by examining antecedents 
and consequences. We often can change 
behaviors by changing what we do 
immediately before and immediately after 
behavior. ABCs of BehaviorWhat Principles and Methods 
Comprise ABA?
Motivation is the heart and soul of ABA.  
Behavior analysts want to know what a 
person is motivated by, what interests 
her, and what she experiences as fun. 
The old cliché is true: different strokes for 
different folks. Perhaps you enjoy a good 
meal of Italian food while another person 
prefers a backyard barbeque. The same 
is true for learners with autism. Motivation 
is individually determined and best 
understood by observing the person and 
his/her choices. It also is important to keep 
in mind that motivation can change on a 
moment-to-moment basis. Even though 
you like a good barbeque, you probably 
wouldn’t want one every night of the week. 
Here’s another example: sometimes you 
prefer to listen to calm music and other 
times to loud, upbeat music. To maximize 
the learner’s fun and performance, 
behavior analysts encourage him/her 
to make choices and incorporate these 
preferences into the teaching interaction.
This moment-to-moment analysis of the 
learner’s motivation can seem like a lot 
of hard work, which goes above and 
beyond the standard curriculum and 
typical teaching strategies. So, why is this 
important and worthwhile? When equipped 
with this information, behavior analysts can 
offer fun activities, interesting objects, and 
desirable items to the learner. The learner 
then associates the instructor with those 
fun and desirable items and activities. 
This often is called pairing yourself 
with reinforcement. It is the essence of 
making learning fun and of building a 
positive association with the instructor. 
The instructor becomes the source of fun 
and desirable items, the person who gives 
squishy balls, teddy grahams, hugs, high 
ﬁves, trips to the playground, and giggles.  
Motivation also is about understanding why Motivation
a learner engages in a certain behavior, 
and is very relevant to understanding 
challenging behaviors. When we 
understand what a person is motivated 
to obtain (attention, a desired object, a 
break from instructional demands), we 
can reorganize the environment. We can 
provide motivating things in the absence of 
challenging behavior and teach the learner 
ways to appropriately request them.
Technically speaking, motivation is often 
called an “establishing operations” (EO)  or 
a “motivational operation” (MO). They are 
events with to properties:
1. a reinforcer-establishing effect that 
establishes what is reinforcing in the 
moment
2. an evocative effect that evokes a 
particular response
In simple terms, an EO determines what is 
wanted and inﬂuences what the individual 
does to get the desired item. Here’s an 
example with an adolescent with autism. 
Jason has been outside on a hot day. 
He gets thirsty and desires water (the 
reinforcer-establishing effect). We now have 
established water as a potential reinforcer. 
The second property, called an evocative 
effect, is demonstrated when Jason does 
something to obtain that reinforcer (water). 
He might take his teacher’s hand and 
lead her to the water fountain. He also 
might give her a picture of a glass of water. 
Thus, the same reinforcer could evoke 
different response at different times or for 
different people. Responses that have been 
successful in the past are more likely to 
occur than other responses.  
ABA Principles & Methods 12Here’s another example. A child sees a 
popular toy from a favorite movie in the 
toy store. She may want it. This is the 
reinforcer-establishing effect. Once in the 
toy store, she may request the toy because 
such requests have been honored in 
the past. This is the evocative effect.  If 
requests have led to obtaining desired 
things, the likelihood of requesting is high 
in these situations. 
This is true for both appropriate and 
inappropriate behaviors used to request 
desired items. Therefore, this concept also 
can be used to understand how challenging 
behaviors emerge. ABA instructors are 
very interested in EOs, and in maximizing 
motivation in general. Understanding 
EOs signiﬁcantly increases the success of 
instruction.
A student is new to the learning 
environment. The teacher puts out an 
array of enticing toys and foods. She 
samples some and plays with some, and 
waits for the learner to indicate an interest. 
As the learner reaches for an item, she 
immediately grants access to the item. She 
also offers praise, hugs and attention while 
the learner eats the snacks and plays with 
the toys. She is pairing herself with rewards 
and working to identify EOs. She wants to 
know what the learner wants. Eventually, 
she will ask the learner to engage in a brief 
task before granting access to the desired 
item.Delmolino, L., & Harris, S. L. (2004). 
Incentives for change: Motivating people 
with autism spectrum disorders to learn 
and gain independence. Bethesda, MD: 
Woodbine House.
Michael, J. (2000). Implications and 
reﬁnements of the establishing operation 
concept. Journal of Applied Behavior 
Analysis, 33, 401-410.
Sundberg, M. L., & Partington, J. W. 
(1998). Teaching language to children 
with autism or other developmental 
disabilities. Pleasant Hill, CA: Behavior 
Analysts, Inc.Motivation
ABA Principles & Methods 13ResourcesBehavior analysts knowingly use reinforcement 
to increase behavior.  However, we all use 
reinforcement every day, in our dealings with 
other people.  We may not call it reinforcement, 
but it is happening all the time! Reinforcement Reinforcement
involves 1) the systematic and immediate 
delivery of a consequence (following a behavior) 
and 2) an increased likelihood that the behavior 
will happen again. In fact, we can only know 
that something is a reinforcer after we watch its 
effect on behavior over time. Simply providing a 
preferred item contingent upon a behavior will 
not necessarily result in an increase in behavior 
under similar conditions in the future.
Type 1 reinforcement (also referred to 
as positive reinforcement) involves the 
addition of something desirable, such as 
praise, hugs, a gummy bear, and stickers.
Example 1
A teacher is instructing Thomas to point 
to objects. She puts a ball, a cup, a 
shoe, a spoon, and a hat on the table.  
She instructs him to “Touch the shoe.”  
Thomas touches the shoe. The teacher 
enthusiastically says, “Hooray! You touched 
the shoe.  Now you get to put on your 
shoes and go outside.”
tBehavior: following an instruction by 
touching an item
tConsequence: received praise and a 
chance to go outside and play
tFuture effect: makes following 
instructions more likely to occur the 
next time someone asks him to do 
something
Example 2
Johnny sees a friend eating a cookie. He 
points to the cookie. His mother then gives 
him a cookie. 
tBehavior: pointing to a desired item 
(cookie) to ask for it
tConsequence: received a cookie when 
(and only when) he asked for it
tFuture effect: makes pointing to a 
desired item (cookie) more likely to 
occur the next time he sees something 
he wantsType 1 Reinforcement
ABA Principles & Methods 14Type 2 reinforcement (also referred to 
as negative reinforcement) involves the 
removal of something undesirable.
Example 1
We turn off an alarm clock to stop the 
loud repetitive sound.
tBehavior: touching “off” button on 
clock
tConsequence: removing 
undesirable alarm sound
tFuture effect: makes “touching-
off-button” behavior more likely to 
occur the next time alarm sounds
 
Example 2
At McDonald’s Playland, a child is 
overwhelmed by the loud noises. The 
child requests to leave, saying “car, car.”  
The family leaves.
tBehavior: requesting to go home
tConsequence: exiting reduces 
exposure to undesired noise
tFuture effect: makes requesting to 
go home more likely to occur the 
next time child experiences high 
noise level
 Type 2 Reinforcementtgeneralized reinforcers such as tokens and 
money that allow access to a range of other 
primary and secondary reinforcers.
Effective programming makes use of both types 
of reinforcement to maximize the learner’s 
progress. The behavior analyst’s goal is to move 
toward the type and schedule of reinforcement 
that will maintain the  behavior in typical settings. Both positive and negative reinforcement 
increase behavior by making the learner’s life 
better.
A note on negative reinforcement: The common 
deﬁnition and the ABA deﬁnition of negative 
reinforcement are different. As previously 
mentioned, the ABA deﬁnition refers to an 
increase in behavior when something annoying 
is stopped or prevented because of our behavior. 
In contrast, the common use of the term is a 
synonym for punishment. These terms can 
lead to confusion. The important piece to focus 
on is the learner’s behavior and what happens 
following the behavior. If the learner repeatedly 
behaves in ways that result in escape or 
avoidance of something undesirable, negative 
reinforcement is in effect. Readers are referred 
to text books on ABA for further information and 
clariﬁcation.
It can be tempting to think of preferred items 
as reinforcers. Yet, before doing so, it must 
be demonstrated that the  contingent use of 
the preferred item is the reason for a behavior 
increase; only  then can the item be called a 
reinforcer. For learners with autism, some items 
and activities are more likely to be reinforcers 
than others.  Primary reinforcers serve a 
biological function and include food, water, 
warmth, and sexual stimulation. Initially, learners 
with autism may be more responsive to primary 
reinforcers. Secondary reinforcers gain their 
potency because they were paired with primary 
reinforcers or other established secondary 
reinforcers. 
There are four types of  secondary reinforcers:
ttangible reinforcers such as trinkets and 
toys,
tactivities-oriented reinforcers such as 
playing a game and going to the movies,
tsocial reinforcers such as physical contact 
and verbal praise, and
ABA Principles & Methods 15Reinforcement
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, 
W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis 
(2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall.
Hall, R. V., & Hall, M. L. (1998). How to 
select reinforcers (2nd ed.). Austin, TX: 
PRO-ED.
Leaf, R., McEachin, J., & Harsh, J. 
D. (Eds.). (1999). A work in progress: 
Behavior management strategies & 
a curriculum for intensive behavioral 
treatment of autism (pp. 23-36). New 
York, NY: DRL Books.
Miller, L. K. (1996).  Principles of 
everyday behavior analysis (3rd 
ed.). Paciﬁc Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole 
Publishing Company.ResourcesShaping
Shaping is a way to reinforce improvement 
in behavior. Shaping is used to gradually 
teach the learner how to do something 
better. Over time, an instructor rewards 
attempts that look more like the desired 
behavior. Thus, the learner is encouraged 
through reinforcement to exhibit more 
appropriate behavior. While shaping 
behavior can be a slow process, it can 
be quite effective if done correctly. This 
process requires that the teacher has both 
intimate knowledge of the learner and the 
ability to shift gears based on the learner’s 
performance. One of the positive effects of 
shaping includes decreasing frustration by 
providing feedback to the learner that he/
she is on the right track. Learning becomes 
more rewarding because there are many 
opportunities for reinforcement along the 
way.
When shaping behavior, there are several 
things to remember. First, shaping is both 
an art and a science. The teacher has 
to respond to the learner’s performance. 
On a moment-to-moment basis, she 
must match the amount of the learner’s 
effort with the amount of reinforcement. 
On a broader scale, a teacher must set 
her requirements based on the learner’s 
performance throughout the day. For example, if a child is feeling ill, it is a good 
idea to maintain the program and not 
require additional effort on this particular 
day. Second, the learner will become skilled 
more quickly when all of his/her teachers 
communicate and agree. This is to say 
that consistency across teachers, parents, 
and others is an important component of 
the shaping process. All instructors must 
communicate to understand the current 
teaching plan. When everyone implements 
the same protocol, the learner more 
efﬁciently acquires skills. This emphasis 
on consistency is also valuable for all other 
teaching programs. 
Behavior analysts often describe their 
teaching method as “shaping” a particular 
behavior. For example, they may say that 
they are shaping vocal sounds. At ﬁrst, a 
vocal approximation of a word would be 
reinforced, for example “ba” for “ball.” As 
the child becomes more ﬂuent in making 
sounds, the teacher reinforces only vocal 
approximations that sound like the target 
word. Behavior analysts also shape other 
behavior, such as compliance, by asking a 
learner to follow one easy instruction. When 
the learner performs that skill well, the 
teacher expects more. To follow the above 
examples, she may ask the child to say, 
“want ball,” or to follow two instructions.
ABA Principles & Methods 16Resource
Foxx, R. M. (1982). Increasing 
behaviors of persons with severe 
retardation and autism. Champaign, IL: 
Research Press .Prompts
Prompts are deﬁned as extra cues or hints 
that help the learner to know what to do in 
a particular situation or time. Prompts are 
things we do to increase the likelihood that 
learners will make the correct responses. 
Whenever a learner is being taught 
something for the ﬁrst time or has not yet 
mastered a skill independently, prompting 
should be used to ensure correct responses 
and to prevent errors. Even after a learner 
has mastered a skill, he/she may still need 
prompting to respond within an appropriate 
amount of time and in new situations. 
MacDuff, G. S., Krantz, P. J., & 
McClannahan, L. E. (2001). Prompts 
and prompt-fading strategies for people 
with autism. In C. Maurice, G. Green, & 
R. M. Foxx (Eds.). Making a difference: 
Behavioral intervention for autism (pp. 
37-50). Austin, TX: PRO-ED.
Van Houten, R. (1998). How to use 
prompts to initiate behavior. Austin, TX: 
PRO-ED.Generally, we use more obvious prompts 
when teaching a new skill and more subtle 
prompts when the learner has mastered 
a skill but needs a reminder. Types of 
prompts include:
tphysical or hand-over-hand assistance
tgestural such as pointing
tmodeling or demonstration
tvisual such as a picture
ttextual such as written checklist
tverbal such as “What do you want?”
Example 1
The instructor says, “Do this,” 
while clapping her hands together. 
She then reaches over to take 
the child’s hands and makes a 
clapping motion with them. This 
physical prompt ensures that 
the learner correctly imitates the 
teacher.
Example 2
A mother and a child are in a toy 
store. The mother says, “You can 
pick out a toy.” The child does not 
respond. The mother then shows 
him two toys and verbally prompts 
him, “Do you want Winnie the 
Pooh or Elmo?” The child grabs 
Elmo. The mother notices that the 
visual and verbal prompts made 
his response more likely.
ABA Principles & Methods 17ResourcesModeling (Imitation Training)
When we are presented with a new 
assignment, we are likely to have a lot of 
questions about how to start the project. 
You may ask yourself, “What do I need to 
do here?” You may feel like you want to 
see exactly what needs to happen.  We all 
like to watch others do something when 
we are learning it for the ﬁrst time.  (Think 
about learning to ride a bike or draw a 
happy face.  These things are much easier 
to do if you have watched someone do it.)  
Typically developing children watch and 
imitate others all day long.  
A model is any antecedent (before the 
behavior) stimulus that is identical in form 
to the behavior. A model is a stimulus that 
the learner imitates.  If we want the child to 
clap his/her hands, and we clap our hands 
while saying, “Do this,” we have provided 
a model. As mentioned in the previous 
section, a model is a type of prompt. 
Models are used in imitation training to 
help learners copy our behavior.  Modeling 
is a powerful instructional tool that also can 
assist learners to master complex skills. For 
example, modeling can be used to teach 
appropriate behavior in social situations. 
A teacher might instruct a learner to “Do 
what your friends are doing,” when he/she 
looks lost during a transitional time while 
other students are cleaning up materials. 
Peers are a wonderful source of learning by 
modeling. Peers in a classroom can model 
appropriate ways to pay attention, complete 
an assignment, ask for help, and interact in 
all kinds of ways.
Usually, we think of modeling as the 
imitation of people who are physically 
present.  However, modeling also can be 
taught using videotapes. Video modeling 
has been shown to be a highly effective technique for teaching play skills and 
some social skills. A learner might watch 
videotaped sequences of children playing 
imaginatively with a dollhouse, and then 
practice what was viewed.
Because of the central importance of 
learning by observation, imitation training 
often is a major focus of early instruction. 
Learners need to be able to imitate very 
simple tasks, sequences of actions, 
and novel actions. When a learner has 
demonstrated the ability to widely imitate 
and to imitate novel actions, they often are 
said to have achieved generalized imitation 
(see page 45). This is an important goal 
for all learners. A child with this ability will 
be able to learn from classmates and other 
peers. 
Many ABA programs spend a lot of time 
during the initial phase of instruction 
teaching learners how to imitate. Later 
phases of instruction incorporate a variety 
of experiences to help the learner imitate 
in more real life situations. Another 
consideration is that learners with autism 
may not be initially motivated to learn 
these skills. Instructors should pay careful 
attention to the quality, quantity, and variety 
of reinforcement provided for progress. 
Much of children’s learning develops 
through imitation as they repeat what they 
hear and do what they see. Imitation is a 
valuable developmental achievement. The 
ability to consistently and ﬂuently imitate 
others offers many beneﬁts in all aspects of 
life.
ABA Principles & Methods 18ABA Principles & Methods 19Buggey, T. (2009). Seeing is believing: 
Video self-modeling for people with 
autism and other developmental 
disabilities. Bethesda, MD: Woodbine 
House. 
Krantz, P. J., MacDuff, G. S., Wadstrom, 
O., McClannahan, L. E., Dowrick, P. W. 
(1991). Using video with developmentally 
disabled learners. In P. W. Dowrick, 
Practical guide to using video in the 
behavioral sciences (pp. 256-266). 
Indianapolis, IN: John Wiley & Sons.
Leaf, R., McEachin, J., & Harsh, J. 
D. (Eds.). (1999). A work in progress: 
Behavior management strategies & 
a curriculum for intensive behavioral 
treatment of autism. New York, NY: DRL 
Books.
Striefel, S.  (1998). How to teach through 
modeling and imitation (2nd ed.).  
Austin, TX: PRO-ED.ResourcesModeling (Imitation Training)Discrete trial instruction (DTI) or discrete 
trial teaching (DTT) has historically been 
the primary instructional method used in 
ABA intervention for children with autism. 
It is a very systematic and methodical way 
of teaching and is supported by a history of 
success in teaching skills across all areas. 
This technique is well suited to individuals 
with autism because it makes instruction 
very clear to the learner. Discrete trials are 
comprised of several components.
1. an SD, or a discriminative stimulus (an 
instruction)
2. a response (what the child does in 
response to the instruction)
3. a consequence (feedback to the child 
about his/her response)
There has been some research on the most 
effective ways to teach when using discrete 
trials. Here is a summary of several of those 
issues.
1. Teach in an errorless way. We know that 
children with autism have a tendency 
to repeat errors, so it is important to 
prevent errors and to interrupt errors 
whenever possible. (It is rare that 
anyone could learn a skill without any Discrete Trial Instruction/Discrete Trial Teaching
MYTH
DTI is just doing the same thing over and 
over and over again.
FACT
Historically, people did do DTI as blocks 
of trials, typically working on the same 
target behavior repetitively. Children were 
asked to do the same thing many times errors. The point here is to minimize the 
errors that a learner may make.)
2. Mix in new material with older, known 
material. Technically, this is called task 
interspersal. For interspersal to be 
effective, you must mix in a new item 
with items that learners know very well 
(have already mastered). We know that 
learners learn more rapidly when taught 
in this way.  It also is more naturalistic 
than asking a child to do the same 
thing many times in a row.
3. Collect data on learning progress. 
This may be done on a trial-by-trial 
basis, or through probe data collection 
techniques (in which the teacher takes 
data only on some of the trials).
 
Discrete Trial Instruction is sometimes 
described incompletely or inaccurately.  
This is because DTI has been conducted 
for many years, and the deﬁnition of “best 
practice” DTI has changed along with the 
evolution of the ﬁeld of ABA. Therefore, 
some people’s views of DTI are only partly 
accurate because they do not have the 
most up-to-date information. Here are some 
of the most common misconceptions that 
people may have about DTI.
(most often 10 times) in a row. While we 
know that repetition helps learning and 
that children with autism require many 
trials of instruction to learn new things, we 
also know that learning is more efﬁcient 
if we vary what we ask the child to do.  
Best practice now dictates that we slowly 
intersperse new items with things the child 
knows very well.
ABA Principles & Methods 20Discrete Trial Instruction/Discrete Trial Teaching
MYTH
DTI is very slow paced.
FACT
Historically, DTI was slower in pace than 
other types of instruction.  This is because 
it was usually done with trial-by-trial data 
recording, which was noted during the time 
between trials. The number of learning 
opportunities is reduced when several 
seconds pass between trials.
  
How slowly or quickly you provide 
instructions, often called pacing, has 
become increasingly important in ABA 
intervention. DTI can be done at a rapid 
rate.  To maximize learning opportunities, 
probe data collection can replace trial-by-
trial data collection. Other modiﬁcations in 
data collection also can assist the teacher 
in maintaining the pace of instruction. 
MYTH
DTI doesn’t result in generalization; kids 
don’t transfer their learning into everyday 
situations.
FACT
Discrete trial instruction initially is used to 
build basic skills and early discriminations. 
(Discrimination means knowing when 
to and when not to do something.) 
Sometimes, this phase of instruction is very 
methodical and does not contain much 
programming for generalization. However, 
for some learners, generalization is built 
into the program from the onset.  And for 
all learners, generalization becomes a focus 
of instruction within DTI. 
It may be necessary to begin teaching 
a speciﬁc skill under very speciﬁc 
circumstances (same instruction, same 
therapist, and same reinforcer) to make it 
easier for the child to ﬁrst learn the skill. Behavior analysts are always aware that 
the ultimate goal is for the child to be able 
to perform this skill in a variety of natural 
situations. At ﬁrst, a discrete trial program 
may have only a few speciﬁc strategies and 
over time become “looser” as additional 
circumstances are introduced into the 
teaching interaction. All learners need to 
be taught when to perform and when not 
to perform certain behaviors. Discrete trial 
instruction that incorporates strategies to 
enhance generalization can be a successful 
way to achieve these goals.
MYTH
DTI doesn’t include child choice because 
the teacher determines the tasks, items 
used, and rewards.
FACT
This was historically true of DTI programs.  
However, intensive instruction has evolved. 
Today, learners are offered many choices 
in instruction.  Preferences are considered 
when determining rewards to be offered 
and activities on which to work.  In fact, 
preferences are continually assessed, 
to ensure that the learner is maximally 
motivated to participate in instruction. 
Furthermore, learners often choose the 
order of tasks they will work on, location of 
work, objects to be used for an activity, etc.
MYTH
Kids who experience a lot of DTI become 
little robots who know how to be compliant 
but not how to be creative.
FACT
At the beginning of a program, teachers ask 
the child for speciﬁc responses, and may 
train in a very specialized way. Thus, the 
ABA Principles & Methods 21Discrete Trial Instruction/Discrete Trial Teaching
Leaf, R., McEachin, J., & Harsh, J. 
D. (Eds.). (1999). A work in progress: 
Behavior management strategies & 
a curriculum for intensive behavioral 
treatment of autism. New York, NY: 
DRL Books.
Lovaas, O. I.  (2002). Teaching 
individuals with developmental delays: 
Basic intervention techniques. Austin, 
TX: PRO-ED.Resourceschild may behave in speciﬁc ways because 
those behaviors have been reinforced. 
However, this only represents an early phase 
of instruction necessary for some learners.  
It always is a priority to naturalize both 
instruction and the child’s behavior.
Yes, it is true that individuals with autism 
exhibit repetitive behaviors in the form of 
motor mannerisms (hand ﬂapping), object 
manipulations (lining up toy cars), language patterns (monotone voice or scripted 
conversation), and social behaviors (one 
track conversation). To varying extents, 
this may be a prominent characteristic 
that people observe about them. A goal 
of behavioral intervention is to constantly 
expand the skill repertoires of people with 
autism. Most importantly, anyone who 
knows someone with autism can tell you 
that he or she is creative in many different 
ways!
MYTH
As long as you have a curriculum, anyone 
can effectively conduct DTI.
FACT
A comprehensive curriculum is certainly an 
essential component of a child’s education. 
However, it is not enough to ensure a 
successful academic experience. You 
need a great teacher to be a great student. 
Everyone knows the value of a good teacher 
who can make the material come “alive.” 
Teachers who use an ABA approach 
are always looking for ways to maximize 
the student’s progress by analyzing the 
student’s performance and the elements 
in the teaching situation (the teacher’s 
behavior, other students’ behavior, the 
setting, the materials used, etc.). It is this 
analysis of the teaching process that is 
most likely to result in the most beneﬁcial 
outcome for the student. The analysis tells 
the teacher important information so that 
he/she can continue effective practices 
and discontinue ineffective practices on an 
ongoing basis.
ABA Principles & Methods 22Many people in the autism community have 
been talking about “Verbal Behavior.” Is it 
a part of ABA? Different from ABA? Better 
than ABA? What is Verbal Behavior? There 
sure has been a lot of verbal behavior 
about Verbal Behavior! To address these 
questions, here are some quick answers.
1. Given that ABA is the science of 
understanding and improving human 
behavior, ABA includes the analysis of 
verbal behavior.
2. Verbal behavior is synonymous 
with communicative behavior. Any 
interaction in which information is being 
conveyed is verbal behavior. Thus, 
verbal behavior includes both vocal 
means (saying a word) and non-vocal 
means (pointing and gesturing) of 
communication.Verbal Behavior
3. The analysis of verbal behavior 
is concerned with the functions 
of language including requests, 
comments, and conversation. Verbal 
Behavior is a system of classifying 
language that behavior analysts ﬁnd 
very useful, both from a theoretical 
perspective (how we think about 
language) and from a practical 
perspective (how to teach language). 
The behavioral psychologist, B. F. 
Skinner, developed the Verbal Behavior 
classiﬁcation system in 1957, and wrote 
about it in his book Verbal Behavior. 
Skinner was concerned with expressive 
language, which also can be described as 
direct communication with others. There 
are several Verbal Behavior categories 
especially relevant to teaching learners with 
autism. Examples follow each category.
Echoic - imitating a sound, word, or phrase
tInstructor says, “Say, ba” as she looks at a ball. Learner says “ba.”
Mand - making a request or demand
tLearner reaches for a toy train (gesture) and says “choo choo” (speech).
Tact - labeling something in the environment
tA teacher holds up an eraser, and says, “What is it?” The learner says, 
“eraser.”
Intraverbal - back and forth conversational exchange; talking about things or 
people not present
tJoey says, “I saw a movie last night.”  Henry says, “What movie did you 
see?”  Joey says, “Finding Nemo. It’s about a ﬁsh.”  Henry says, “Cool.  I 
saw that one, too. It was good.”Verbal Behavior Classiﬁcations
ABA Principles & Methods 23It is important to recognize that 
Verbal Behavior is not an instructional 
methodology, but a framework for thinking 
about language development. This 
classiﬁcation system is important because 
it also identiﬁes different reinforcers for 
each type of verbal behavior. For example, 
the reinforcer for requesting something 
you want should be receiving that item you 
requested. This classiﬁcation of language 
has been the framework of several 
interventions or teaching methodologies 
for learners with autism, including the 
Picture Exchange Communication System 
(PECS; Bondy & Frost, 2001; see page 
28) and Natural Environment Training 
(NET; Sundberg & Partington, 1998; see 
page 27). The success of both intervention 
packages in building communication 
skills is impressive, and may be due, 
in part, to this attention to categories of 
communication.
Bondy, A. S., & Frost, L. A. (2001). A 
picture’s worth: PECS and other visual 
communication strategies in autism. 
Bethesda, MD: Woodbine House.
Skinner, B. F. (1957). Verbal behavior. 
East Norwalk, CT: Appleton-Century-
Crofts.
Sundberg, M. L., & Michael, J. (2001). 
The beneﬁts of Skinner’s analysis 
of verbal behavior for children with 
autism. Behavior Modiﬁcation, 25, 
698-724.Resources
ABA Principles & Methods 24Verbal BehaviorNatural Environment Training
Sundberg & Partington (1998) have taken 
this classiﬁcation system and created an 
intervention package to systematically teach 
language. They have added other areas of 
curricular emphasis and recommended 
a variety of instructional methods to be 
used along with this classiﬁcation system.  
Their model of intervention is called 
Natural Environment Training (NET), which 
has received a great deal of attention in 
recent years.  Sometimes intensive ABA 
programming using both the VB classiﬁcation 
system and elements of NET is referred to as 
a Verbal Behavior program.
Other components of instruction common in 
NET include 1) short inter-trial intervals also 
known as rapid pacing, 2) errorless learning, 
3) task interspersal, 4) child directed choice 
of materials, 5) probe data collection, and 
6) sign language as a nonverbal means of 
communication training.
Resources
Inter-trial intervals – the amount of 
time between teaching trials
Errorless learning – using instructions 
and prompts that will ensure the learner’s 
accuracy
Task interspersal – mixing known tasks 
with new tasks
Child choice – using the materials 
and activities that the child chooses and 
desires
Probe data collection – occasional 
data collection to obtain an estimate 
of how often a behavior is happening; 
also a sample of how well a learner is 
performing a particular task
Sign language – using gestures to 
communicateGlossary
ABA Principles & Methods 25Partington, J. W., & Sundberg, M. 
L. (1998). The assessment of basic 
language and learning skills: An 
assessment, curriculum guide, and 
tracking system for children with autism 
or other developmental disabilities. 
Pleasant Hill, CA: Behavior Analysts, Inc. 
Sundberg, M .L., & Partington, J. W. 
(1998). Teaching language to children 
with autism or other developmental 
disabilities.  Pleasant Hill, CA:  Behavior 
Analysts, Inc.Mand Training
A child reaches for a bottle of bubbles. The 
instructor says, “What do you want?” The 
child says “ba.” The instructor gives the 
child bubbles.
Tact Training
The instructor holds up train and says, 
“What is it?” The child says “train.” The 
instructor says, “choo, choo” and pretends 
to be a train, inviting the child to do so, too.
Intra-Verbal Training (Beginning)
The instructor says, “The cow says…” The 
child says “moo.” The instructor smiles and 
says, “moo” back to the child.
Intra-Verbal Training (Advanced)
The instructor asks, “Where did you go on 
vacation?” The child answers, “I went to the 
beach.” The instructor says, “Ooh, I love 
the ocean!” The child says, “Me, too! And I 
made a sandcastle with my dad!”The Picture Exchange Communication 
System (PECS) is a picture-based system 
that was developed for learners with 
social communication deﬁcits (Bondy 
& Frost, 2001). PECS is an alternative 
communication system in which an 
individual independently uses pictures to 
express his wants and needs. The PECS 
system utilizes behavioral principles and 
techniques such as motivation, prompting, 
shaping, differential reinforcement, 
reinforcer assessment, and transfer of 
stimulus control. 
One of the unique characteristics of the 
PECS program is that it teaches the learner 
to initiate an interaction with the listener. 
The pictures are kept in a notebook, and 
a learner is taught to create sentences by 
selecting pictures and delivering them to 
the communicative partner as a request for 
a desired item. PECS emphasizes teaching 
a learner to request items, respond to 
questions, and make social comments. 
Learners with autism often have deﬁcits 
in these areas and beneﬁt greatly from 
programming that targets these social skills.
The goal of the ﬁrst phase of PECS 
training is to teach a learner to initiate a Picture Exchange Communication System
communication by approaching someone 
when he/she wants or needs something. 
It is recommended to use two people: a 
listener and a prompter. When the learner 
reaches for a desired item, the prompter 
guides him/her to pick up the picture with 
whatever assistance is necessary. Some 
learners may need a physical prompt; 
others may need a gestural prompt. Next, 
the individual reaches toward and places 
the picture in the open hand of the listener. 
During this phase of training, it is important 
that the prompter gradually fade the 
prompts over several opportunities.
In phase two of PECS training, more 
naturalistic aspects of communication are 
introduced, the communicative partner 
gradually moves away, and pictures are 
further from the learner but still in plain 
sight. The goal is to teach the learner how 
to request items in all situations in which 
something is desired. In phase three, 
attention is devoted to teaching picture 
discriminations.
Phases four, ﬁve, and six are advanced 
lessons within PECS.  Phase four 
introduces sentence structure within 
the system. Teaching simple sentence 
formation using “I want…” or “I see…” is 
one way to know if the learner is making a 
comment or a request. This new language 
structure (a sentence) is taught using the 
language function (requesting), which the 
learner already knows. Phase ﬁve focuses 
on answering simple questions starting 
with “What do you want?” Phase six 
teaches learners how to comment on their 
experiences. After learners successfully 
complete all six phases of PECS training, 
they will have many communication skills to 
use spontaneously and respond to others.Resource
Bondy, A. S., & Frost, L. A. (2001). A 
picture’s worth: PECS and other visual 
communication strategies in autism. 
Bethesda, MD: Woodbine House.
ABA Principles & Methods 26Incidental Teaching
Incidental teaching is a process to help 
learners expand their verbal skills. While 
the term incidental teaching often refers 
to everyday activities as opportunities 
for learning, incidental teaching in ABA 
intervention has a more speciﬁc deﬁnition 
and suggested steps. For our purposes, 
incidental teaching is deﬁned as waiting 
for the learner to initiate a request or a 
conversation and then responding in ways 
that foster more language. 
The procedure is broken down into the 
following steps:
1. Child initiates for an item or activity. 
Initiation could be in the form of verbal language, sign language, picture 
exchange, gesturing, pointing, or 
leading.
2. Adult requests an elaboration in the 
form of a
a. Non-verbal cue, such as shrugging 
shoulders, looking expectantly, or 
pointing to the item.
b. Verbal cue, such as “What do you 
want?”
c. Verbal model, such as  “Say, I want 
juice.”
3. Child responds with a slightly better 
response than the ﬁrst initiation. For 
example, attempting to name an object 
is better than only pointing to it
4. Adult provides the child with the 
requested object.
(See the resources for suggestions on how 
to increase the number of correct and 
elaborated responses.)
Fenske, E. C.,  Krantz, P. J., & 
McClannahan, L. E. (2001). 
Incidental teaching: A not-discrete-
trial teaching procedure. In C. 
Maurice, G. Green, & R. M. Foxx. 
(Eds.). Making a difference: 
Behavioral intervention for autism 
(pp. 75-82). Austin, TX: PRO-ED. 
Hart, B., & Risley, T. R. (1982). 
How to use incidental teaching for 
elaborating language. Lawrence, KS: 
H&H Enterprises. Resources
Example 1
A desired toy train is out of reach 
on the child’s dresser. The child 
stretches his arm over the dresser 
but cannot reach the train. The 
parent says, “What do you want? 
Train?” The child says, “T’ain!” 
The parent gives the train to the 
child.
Example 2
A child opens his lunchbox and 
ﬁnds that there is no straw for 
his juicebox. The teacher notices 
the student’s predicament and 
looks expectantly at him, waiting 
for him to ask for help. The child 
says, “Uh. Oh.” The teacher says, 
“What do you need?” The child 
says, “Straw.” The teacher brings 
him a new straw.
ABA Principles & Methods 27As you may have guessed from reading 
the previous sections, there are many 
combinations of antecedent-based 
interventions and consequence-based 
interventions that you can use to make 
a behavior more likely to happen. 
Parents typically use antecedents such 
as instructions. For example, a parent 
says, “Clean up your toys, please.” The 
child is more likely to do so following 
the instruction than doing so on his 
own accord. After the child follows the 
instruction, the parent might offer a 
consequence such as praise, “Thanks 
for listening to Mommy. Now we can 
go outside to the swings!” The clear 
instruction, verbal praise, and access to 
a preferred activity all work to increase 
the child’s compliance. Many intervention 
packages do the same thing: they combine 
strategies to maximize a learner’s progress. 
Behavior analysts who researched various 
teaching strategies were able to identify 
some of the most powerful ones. Then, 
they combined them into a package called 
Pivotal Response Training (PRT). 
PRT is a set of instructional strategies that 
can increase a learner’s motivation and 
teach important skills. For learners with 
autism, this effect is extremely important. 
Oftentimes, learners with autism are 
not motivated to participate in social or 
educational interactions. When learners 
are motivated, they can learn so much 
more. PRT incorporates strategies that 
help parents and teachers make the 
most of the learner’s skills and choices 
in everyday settings. Also, parents can 
learn how to use PRT during instructional 
time and throughout daily activities.  Pivotal Response Training
Furthermore, PRT targets skills that are 
important and useful in many activities. 
For example, PRT can build a set of 
behaviors such as imitation, compliance, 
and communication.
There are seven (7) main points to 
remember:
The question/instruction/opportunity to 
respond should:
1. Be clear, uninterrupted, and 
appropriate to the task
2. Be interspersed with maintenance 
tasks (tasks the learner can already do 
with ease)
3. Be chosen by the child, to a large 
extent (watch what the child is looking 
at, pointing to, or touching and use 
those items)
4. Include multiple components (such as 
the ‘blue block’ or the ‘red ball’)
Reinforcers should be:
5. Contingent upon the behavior (only 
when the behavior is performed 
and not when the behavior is not 
performed)
6. Administered following any attempts to 
respond (shaping)
7. Related to the desired behavior (such 
as giving bubbles when the child 
says “open” while twisting the jar of 
bubbles instead of giving a food item 
as a reward)
You will ﬁnd many examples of how to use 
these strategies in How to Teach Pivotal 
Behaviors to Children with Autism: A 
Training Manual. Overall, these lessons 
ABA Principles & Methods 28ResourcesPivotal Response Training
Koegel, L. K., Koegel, R. L., Shoshan, 
Y., & McNerney, E. (1999). Pivotal 
response intervention II: Preliminary 
long-term outcomes data. Journal 
of the Association for Persons with 
Severe Handicaps, 24, 186-198.
Koegel, R. L., & Koegel, L. K. (2005). 
Pivotal response treatments for autism: 
Communication, social, and academic 
development. Baltimore, MD: Brookes 
Publishing.
Koegel, R. L., & Koegel, L. K. (Eds.) 
(1995). Teaching children with 
autism: Strategies for initiating positive 
interactions and improving learning 
opportunities. Baltimore, MD: Brookes 
Publishing.
Koegel, R. L., Schreibman, L., Good, 
A., Cerniglia, L., Murphy, C., & Koegel, 
L. K. (1989). How to teach pivotal 
behaviors to children with autism: A 
training manual. Santa Barbara, CA: 
University of California.
Available at http://www.education.
ucsb.edu/autism/behaviormanuals.are intended to be clear, brief, and fun. 
Of course, the speciﬁc goals, materials, 
and settings will be individualized for the 
learner, as with all ABA interventions. 
PRT offers a set of strategies to keep 
learners paying attention and engaged. 
PRT episodes should be incorporated 
into planned and natural activities on 
a frequent basis (suggested rate is one 
episode every two minutes). The training 
also encourages learners to initiate their 
needs and wants and to respond to others. 
By providing the learner with choices of 
motivating items, mixing some new tasks 
with easy tasks, and rewarding attempts, a 
teacher can be both effective and fun.
(Note: PRT is similar to Incidental 
Teaching and Mand Training within 
Natural Environment Training in their 
focus on choice, reinforcing attempts, and 
reinforcing contingently.)
ABA Principles & Methods 29When you think about many of the tasks 
you perform on a daily basis, you realize 
how many steps are involved in each task. 
You may be even more aware of how many 
steps there are when you are learning 
something new, such as how to program 
your VCR. To learn this complex skill, you 
may watch someone else do it and write 
down all the steps. Or, you might closely 
follow the instructions in the manual. But 
what if those instructions weren’t clear? 
You would need more information and 
more reinforcement for your attempts if you 
wanted to prevent frustration.
The same is true for learners with autism. 
They also need clear instructions and 
plenty of reinforcement for accomplishing 
some, and eventually all, parts of a task. 
One of the ways behavior analysts do this 
is by creating and using a task analysis. A 
task analysis involves breaking a complex 
skill into smaller, teachable units.  In 
creating a task analysis, an instructor 
creates a road map for how to teach a skill, 
step by step.  There is ample beneﬁt for the 
learner; access to reinforcement is much 
greater when the task is taught in this 
manner.
An example of a task analysis is listed 
below.  There are many ways to write a 
task analysis, and the same task could 
be described many different ways.  A 
learner’s skill level, preferences, and setting 
characteristics can inﬂuence exactly how a 
task analysis is written.
Arranging a place setting at the table could 
include the following steps:
1.  Put placemat on the table
2.  Place plate on placematTask Analysis & Chaining
3.  Place napkin on left side of plate
4.  Place fork on napkin
5.  Place knife on right side of plate
6.  Place spoon on right side of plate
7.  Place cup at top of plate
This example assumes that all of the 
necessary items are within the learner’s 
reach. This task analysis would be 
expanded further to include additional 
behaviors in order to get each of these 
items from their appropriate places. 
Similarly, this task analysis could be 
expanded to additional items, place 
settings, and other mealtime activities.
It is relatively easy to create a task analysis. 
There are several methods you can use. 
One method is to perform the behavior 
yourself and take note of each step of the 
behavior. Alternately, you could watch 
another person perform the behavior. If you 
do this, select a person who can perform 
the skill well. In creating the task analysis, 
the steps of the behavior will be linked 
together to create a behavior chain. Then, 
a task analysis assessment can then be 
done to evaluate what steps of the chain 
already are performed well by the learner. 
This enables the instructor to further 
individualize instruction by focusing on the 
steps that are not yet independent. 
When taught through chaining, it is 
important that the steps be taught in order. 
At times, chaining is taught using a forward 
chaining procedure in which the steps are 
targeted beginning with the ﬁrst step. In 
the above example, the student would ﬁrst 
be taught to put the placemat on the table 
independently. Reinforcement is provided 
for successfully completing this step. The 
teacher then assists the learner to put the 
ABA Principles & Methods 30plate on the placemat and complete the 
rest of the steps. When the learner can 
perform one step independently on a few 
occasions, the teacher requires that two 
steps be completed to earn reinforcement.
Chaining also can be taught using a 
backward chaining procedure.  In this 
approach to chaining, the individual is 
led through all the steps of the chain 
and ﬁrst learns how to do the last step 
independently (placing the cup, in the 
above example).  Then, the learner would 
achieve independence on the ﬁnal two 
steps, and then the ﬁnal three steps, 
and so on until the chain is completed 
independently. Backward chaining has 
an advantage over forward chaining in 
some situations. This advantage is the 
immediate availability of natural reinforcers 
for completing the last step. In the above 
example, after the learner places his cup on 
the table, dinner is served. Food and drink 
are great reinforcers. Another example is 
teaching a child to put on his coat before 
going outside to the swings. As soon as he 
completes the ﬁnal step(s) of the backward 
chain (zipping the coat), he can run 
outside!
This systematic approach offers many 
opportunities for the learner to become 
familiar with the task, the teacher to 
reinforce new skills, and both to enjoy the Task Analysis & Chaining
process.  
Baker, B. L., & Brightman, A. J. 
(2003). Steps to independence: 
Teaching everyday skills to children 
with special needs (4th ed.). Baltimore, 
MD: Brookes Publishing.
Foxx, R. M. (1982). Increasing 
behaviors of persons with severe 
retardation and autism. Champaign, IL: 
Research Press.Resources
ABA Principles & Methods 31Token Economy
Take a moment to review the two types of 
reinforcers. Primary reinforcers meet a basic 
human need such as hunger, thirst, and 
warmth. Secondary reinforcers are learned 
over time because of their association with 
primary reinforcers. Secondary reinforcers 
could include smiles from loved ones, 
verbal praise, preferred toys, and money. 
As an example, a person goes to work 
everyday to earn money. At the end of the 
week, the person looks forward to receiving 
the paycheck. Why? Because money is a 
powerful secondary (generalized) reinforcer. 
Money can give you access to a wide variety 
of both primary (food and shelter) and 
secondary (leisure time and preferred items) 
reinforcers. Money is one example of a ‘token’ 
in a token economy.
A token economy makes use of secondary 
reinforcers to bridge the gap between a 
behavior and access to other reinforcers. 
Token economies can be comprehensive and 
positive motivational systems. For example, a 
student is supposed to stay in his seat for an 
entire thirty-minute class period but he has 
never done so. One possible intervention is 
a token economy in which he earns tokens 
for smaller amounts of time in which he 
is sitting appropriately. He could earn one 
token for every ﬁve minutes of appropriate sitting. If he earns ﬁve of the possible six 
tokens, he can choose an extra snack 
at lunch time or some other appropriate 
reinforcer. In this example, the student earns 
a token for appropriate sitting and learns to 
sit appropriately for longer amounts of time. 
Gradually, the teacher would increase the 
amount of time during which he had to sit 
appropriately to earn the tokens. A rule of 
thumb is to keep the program achievable and 
challenging, meaning that the student should 
be successful on most occasions as you 
encourage better performance.
The token economy can also include a 
response cost component. A response 
cost means that if the student exhibits a 
response there is a cost. Using the above 
example, let’s suppose the student was 
disruptive by throwing his pencil and papers 
on the ﬂoor. After attempting various positive 
interventions, the team decided to add 
a response cost component to his token 
economy. Every time the student threw his 
pencil and papers on the ﬂoor, a token was 
taken away.  It is important to know that a 
response cost element is not recommended 
in the early stages of instruction in a token 
economy.  As previously mentioned, token 
economies should be used as purely positive 
motivational systems whenever possible. It is 
also important to keep in mind other relevant 
guidelines for using behavior reduction 
procedures when implementing a response 
cost component.
Overall, token economies are a powerful 
and systematic tool to expand reinforcement 
options and delay the delivery of  
reinforcement to a more typical schedule. By 
doing so, we increase the types of reinforcers 
that will motivate learners with autism. Resource
Ayllon, T. (1999). How to use token 
economy and point systems (2nd ed.). 
Austin, TX: PRO-ED.
ABA Principles & Methods 32Activity Schedules
Learning a new skill or keeping occupied 
during down time can be difﬁcult for 
learners with autism. What can you do to 
help them? An activity schedule is a tool 
that they can use to help promote their 
independence during play, leisure, and 
academic time. An activity schedule is a set 
of pictures or words that cues a sequence 
of activities. Additionally, schedules help to 
promote choice and can set the occasion for 
initiations to others. Typical materials for an 
activity schedule include a photo album or 
three-ring binder, stickers, activity photos, 
and a preferred item that will serve as a 
reinforcer for accomplishing the task.   
Learners are likely to be successful with an 
activity schedule when they can consistently 
accomplish the following prerequisite skills:
tidentify pictures versus background;
tmatch identical objects;
tmatch picture to object;
taccept guidance;
tuse materials appropriately; and
tobtain materials from a different location.
When selecting activities, keep in mind that 
they must be familiar or mastered by the 
learner with autism because you are teaching 
how to complete the sequence of the 
activities, not the actual tasks. The activities 
should be age appropriate and have a clear 
ending. Toys such as play-do or building 
blocks are not recommended at ﬁrst because 
they do not have a clear ending. Initial items 
could include puzzles, nesting cups, stacking 
rings, etc. The schedule should end with a 
snack or a preferred activity (for example, 
tickles from a parent).  
Much of the work leading up to a successful 
activity schedule experience is preparation. 
Behavior analysts prepare the materials, 
rewards, and tokens and organize the 
environment to display the materials in a visible and accessible manner. Over time, 
the learner will progress from prompted 
interaction with the materials to spontaneous 
interaction coupled while following the 
schedule. As is true for all ABA interventions, 
the goal is to make the learner as 
independent as possible so that he/she can 
complete the activity, ask for assistance when 
needed, and enjoy his/her new abilities.  
The ﬁve basic steps in the activity schedule 
process are as follows: turn to a page, point 
to the photograph, obtain the materials, 
complete the activity, and put away the 
materials. The instructor provides and fades 
prompts based on the learner’s progress 
and delivers rewards on the same basis. 
Oftentimes, beginning learners need frequent 
reinforcement to stay motivated and on 
track. The use of an activity schedule does 
not have to be limited to playing with toys or 
completing academic tasks. Some clinicians 
have had great success teaching children 
and adults with autism how to socialize with 
their peers using an activity schedule in the 
initial stages of programming. 
The ability to follow an activity schedule 
brings many beneﬁts to the learner such as 
independence and choice. It can also be 
generalized to many types of daily activities 
for learners of all ages.
Resource
McClannahan, L. E., & Krantz, P. J. 
(2010).  Activity schedules for children 
with autism:  Teaching independent 
behavior (2nd ed.). Bethesda, MD: 
Woodbine House. 
ABA Principles & Methods 33Precision Teaching with Rate Building
Precision Teaching (PT) is an area of ABA that 
has been practiced and researched for many 
years. In fact, PT is a form of ABA instruction 
that has been widely used with typical and 
learning-challenged populations, with great 
results. It is only recently, in fact, that PT has 
been signiﬁcantly extended to learners with 
autism.
Precision Teaching focuses on building the 
rate at which learners can demonstrate skills, 
and focuses on the attainment of ﬂuency.  
Fluency refers to the combination of accuracy 
plus speed that characterizes competent 
performance. When people are ﬂuent in skills, 
they can do them effortlessly and ﬂuidly. They appear quite expert at them. Think about how 
you drive or make a sandwich. You do not 
think through every element of those tasks; 
you can perform them easily and with little 
or no attention to executing each movement. 
Sometimes, learners with autism can exhibit 
skills, but are not ﬂuent at them. If compared to 
how others did those tasks, it often looks more 
laborious and takes more time to do the tasks 
compared to a ﬂuent and competent peer. 
Precision Teaching (sometimes called 
Fluency-Based Instruction) is a method 
of building response rates and developing 
ﬂuency in a variety of skill areas. When PT 
is applied to learners with autism, there is a 
focus on the rate of skill demonstration and 
use of a speciﬁc measuring system to chart 
student progress. (This system is known as 
the Standard Celeration Chart.) In addition to 
addressing issues such as long response times 
(often called latency to respond) and rate of 
skill demonstration, PT addresses deﬁcits in 
component skills which can impede progress 
on more complex tasks.
How does Precision Teaching work? Attention 
is paid to the rate at which the learner can 
perform the task. Generally, PT is done in short 
sprints, to increase rate of skill performance. 
Teaching includes timed practices in which 
the learner is expected to reach a speciﬁc 
goal. These goals are often referred to as 
performance aims and demonstrate the 
learner’s ﬂuency with a skill. In addition, 
attention is paid to the concept of component 
skills, which are building block skills for more 
complex skills. For example, component skills 
include reaching, pointing, and grasping, which 
could all impact on skills such as matching or 
identifying objects. Often, PT with rate-building 
focuses on the development of core motor skills 
that assist the learner in performing many other 
more complex tasks. Of course, PT with rate 
building can also be used to teach complex 
skills, as long as the foundation skills are 
already ﬁrmly established.Resources
Binder, C. (1996). Behavioral ﬂuency: 
Evolution of a new paradigm. The 
Behavior Analyst, 19, 163-197.
Fabrizio, M. (February and March, 
2003). A parent’s introduction to 
ﬂuency: Parts I and II. The OARacle. 
Alexandria, VA: The Organization for 
Autism Research.
Available at 
http://www.researchautism.org.
Fabrizio, M. A. & Moors, A. L.  (2003).  
Evaluating mastery: Measuring 
instructional outcomes for children with 
autism.  European Journal of Behavior 
Analysis, 4, 23-36.
McGreevy, P. (1983). Teaching and 
learning in plain English: An introduction 
to precision teaching and precision 
tutoring (2nd ed.). Kansas City, MO: 
Plain English Publications.
ABA Principles & Methods 34There are several ways to determine target 
rates. There are some resources available with 
normed rates, including a set from learners on 
the autism spectrum, collected by Fabrizio & 
Moors. When no target rate is available, typical 
peers can be sampled to determine a target 
range.
Examples of skills that might be targeted via 
PT with rate-building are motor skills such as 
grasping, reaching, placing, and pulling as well 
as other skills such as matching pictures and 
answering questions. Precision Teaching with Rate Building
Example 2
Alternately, a child might be working on 
pointing. (Assume the learner knows how 
to point and is now working on pointing 
more rapidly and independently.) 
Teacher: “Ok, Sally, it is time to do 
pointing. Remember go as fast as you 
can. You see your chart? We are trying to 
get to the red line. Ready, set, go.”
Learner: points rapidly in succession. 
Teacher provides coaching 
encouragement along the way. Teacher 
(at end of interval notices that the child 
did not meet her goal): “Great try, Sally. 
Let’s do it again, and I’ll help this time.”
The teacher might then perform a guided 
practice to help the learner understand 
the target rate. The maximum number of 
timings conducted on a single day is10 
(although timings are not successive 
and cease whenever the daily goal is 
reached). If success is not achieved, 
adjustments are made in instruction to 
increase success on the following day.Example 1
A learner working on identifying 
pictures could begin a session as 
follows (Assume the learner already 
had sufﬁcient prompting and practice, 
has the component skills, and is now 
performing independently.)
Teacher: “Ok, Sammy. It’s time to do 
your pictures. Remember go as fast as 
you can. Your goal is 15. Ready, set, 
go.”
Learner: rapidly labels items on 
table. T eacher provides coaching 
encouragement along the way.
At the end of the interval the timer goes 
off and the teacher counts 16 correct. 
She says, “Terriﬁc. You met your goal. 
Hooray!”
The teacher would then indicate that 
the goal has been met on the chart, and 
would make adjustments in instruction 
for the next day (e.g., lengthening the 
timing). When the student has met 
the goal in the terminal timing length 
(e.g., 1 minute) or at an earlier point in 
instruction if performance warrants it, 
the teacher would assess whether the 
student can demonstrate the skill with 
novel materials (application), in the face 
of distraction (stability), and for longer 
periods of time (endurance). If all of 
those criteria are met, the skill would 
not be practiced for about a month, 
and then a retention check would be 
conducted. 
ABA Principles & Methods 35Functional Assessment & Functional Analysis
At a recent support group for parents 
of children with autism, ﬁve mothers 
and two fathers spent time discussing 
their children’s problem behaviors. All of 
the parents questioned what behaviors 
were “because of the autism” and what 
behaviors were typical of children their 
age. These parents shared their stories 
about when the behavior occurred, what 
might have set off the problem, and the 
aftermath. 
One parent told of the following episode. 
Mandy said, “We were at my four-year-
old nephew’s party and there was so 
much noise. My sister had about twenty 
kids running all over her house. David 
was actually doing pretty well. I thought 
it was going to be a rough day for him so 
I brought some of his favorite toys. After 
being there for about two hours, it was time 
to sing “Happy Birthday.” Well, David just 
couldn’t hold on any longer. He ran over 
to my husband and covered his ears as he 
screamed at the top of his lungs. People 
couldn’t really hear him during the song 
but, ooohh, did they get an earful once the 
song was over. We had to bring him into 
another room to calm him down. We talked 
to him softly and reminded him that his 
favorite toys were nearby. I know we gave 
him a lot of attention for screaming but we 
didn’t have too many other options given 
the situation. Luckily, my sister and her 
friends know David and the party continued 
during our little episode. I wonder how he’s 
going to do at my friend’s daughter’s party 
next month.”
The great news is that this parent 
remembered so much information about 
the situation. She could use this information 
to ﬁgure out how to make it better for the 
next time. First, behavior analysts ﬁnd out 
why the problem behavior is happening by writing down what happened before and 
after the behavior. Events that occur well 
before the behavior include a full night’s 
sleep, medication, diet, and interactions 
with others. These are formally known 
as setting events. It makes sense that 
setting events change the likelihood of 
a behavior occurring. Behavior analysts 
also write down the antecedents and the 
consequences of the behavior. This is 
called ABC data because information is 
collected on the antecedents (A), behaviors 
(B), and consequences (C). Second, they 
review many ABC episodes individually 
and together to look for a pattern. Third, 
they use that pattern to predict when the 
behavior is likely and unlikely  to happen. 
Next, they take an educated guess about 
what is reinforcing or maintaining the 
behavior. This is called the function of 
the behavior, the purpose the behavior 
serves, or how the person communicates 
his wants and needs through this behavior. 
Lastly, they use this information to change 
the setting events, antecedents, and 
consequences. By doing so, we carefully 
encourage and reinforce appropriate 
behavior more often than the problem 
behavior. While some of this initially takes 
more work, the end results are often great.
Going back to the birthday party example, 
Mandy noted some things that happened 
before and after David screamed. With the 
guidance of a behavior analyst, she wrote 
this information down so they could look at 
it together.
The above information told Mandy a 
number of things about David’s behavior 
and how she might go about decreasing 
it. First, David was provided with attention 
from one or both parents following all three 
screaming episodes. Second, all episodes 
of the behavior were very intense. When 
ABA Principles & Methods 36David screamed, he was loud and visibly 
distraught. Third, David was often not 
receiving a lot of attention from his parents 
before the behavior. When Mandy looked 
at this information laid out in front of her, 
she was surprised to see these patterns 
emerged. She knew that she and her 
husband were loving parents who gave 
David a lot of attention throughout the day. 
Why was he screaming when he didn’t have 
their attention? 
The behavior analyst pointed out that David 
wanted to be around them because they 
were so responsive to his needs, as good 
parents are. They have provided much 
reinforcement throughout David’s life and 
as a result, he highly valued their attention. 
The team was well on its way to ﬁguring out 
what to do to improve the situation. They 
knew one of David’s possible reinforcers 
was attention from Mom and Dad. The 
behavior analyst asked the parents how 
they could more carefully use their attention 
to increase David’s appropriate behavior. 
The parents decided to provide David with 
attention when he was acting appropriately: 
perhaps doing so before David was likely 
to scream might prevent the behavior 
altogether. The behavior analyst thought 
this was a great idea and added one more. 
The parents could also teach David an 
easy way to communicate what he wanted. 
While he could say some words some of the 
time, he often didn’t use his words when he 
was overwhelmed or frustrated. Providing 
him with easy ways, such as hand signals, 
to quickly communicate that he wanted to 
leave a situation or ask for attention could 
also lessen the chance of the screaming 
behavior happening again. 
This example demonstrates the process of 
functional assessment and the beginning 
phase of intervention planning. There are Functional Assessment & Functional Analysis
other components that this team could add 
to David’s treatment plan. It is important 
to note that behaviors that may seem to 
suddenly occur out of the blue or have no 
connection to the immediate environment, 
may in fact be related to the immediate 
Frea, W. D., Koegel, L. K., & Koegel, R. 
L. (1994). Understanding why problem 
behaviors occur:  A guide for assisting 
parents in assessing causes of behavior 
and designing treatment plans. Santa 
Barbara, CA: University of California. 
Available at http://www.education.ucsb.
edu/autism/behaviormanuals.html
Glasberg, B. A. (2005). Functional 
behavior assessment for people with 
autism: Making sense of seemingly 
senseless behavior. Bethesda, MD: 
Woodbine House. 
O’Neill, R. E., Horner, R. H., Albin, 
R. W., Sprague, J. R., Storey, K., and 
Newton, J. S. (1997).  Functional 
assessment and program development 
for problem behavior: A practical 
handbook (2nd ed.).  Paciﬁc Grove, CA: 
Brooks Publishing Company.
Romanczyk, R. (1996). Behavioral 
analysis and assessment: The 
cornerstone to effectiveness. In C. 
Maurice (Ed.), G. Green, & S. C. Luce 
(Co-eds.). Behavioral intervention for 
young children with autism: A manual 
for parents and professionals (pp.195-
217). Austin, TX: PRO-ED.Resources
ABA Principles & Methods 37environment. By analyzing this information 
and changing the behavior’s antecedents 
and consequences, a person’s response can 
be greatly improved. 
Typically, behavior analysts gather functional 
assessment information in two ways: 
interviewing people who know the learner 
and observing actual episodes of the 
behavior to collect ABC data. Sometimes, 
this information is not enough to hypothesize 
a function of the behavior and develop a 
treatment plan that is likely to be successful. 
In these instances, a process known as 
functional analysis may be conducted. 
Conducting a functional analysis requires 
a behavior analyst with knowledge and 
experience in the implementation of this 
complex process. In this procedure, the 
Episode 
    
Setting 
Event 
Antecedent
Behavior
Consequence1       2    3
Noisy and crowd-
ed setting with 
occasional atten-
tion from Mom 
and Dad
Singing Happy 
Birthday
Screamed for 3 
minutes at a high 
volume
Mom and Dad 
took him into a 
quiet room to 
calm him downElmo video playing, 
bad night sleep
Mom on the phone
Screamed for 2 
minutes at a high 
volume
Mom had to get 
off the phone to 
ﬁnd out what was 
wrongWalking around 
the backyard
Dad turned on 
the lawn mower
Screamed for 
4 minutes at a 
high volume
Mom took him 
inside to calm 
him downFunctional Assessment & Functional Analysis
behavior analyst systematically changes the 
environment when the learner engages in 
the problem behavior. Doing so allows the 
team to see when the behavior is likely and 
unlikely to happen. Often, this information 
is sufﬁcient to understand the problem 
behavior and begin intervention planning. 
Expertise in conducting functional analyses 
is essential to ensure that the challenging 
behavior is managed safely and effectively 
throughout the assessment process.  
The take-home message of functional 
assessment is that all challenging behavior 
is seen as communication. The individual 
is telling us something. The next time an 
individual engages in challenging behavior, 
the information gathering described above 
will help create a better situation.
 
ABA Principles & Methods 38As you have learned by reading the 
previous sections, behavior analysts 
attempt to change what happens before 
and after a behavior to make it more 
or less likely to occur. You have read 
about theoretical principles and speciﬁc 
antecedent and consequence strategies 
to change behavior. Clearly, modern ABA 
encompasses a wide variety of techniques. 
While there was a heavy emphasis on 
consequence-based strategies in the 
past, researchers and clinicians are 
now learning more about how to change 
behavior in more sophisticated ways. Let 
us now look more closely at antecedent-
based interventions.
This focus on changing the environment 
before a behavior occurs is advantageous 
for several reasons. First, in the situation 
of challenging behavior, the goal is to 
prevent the behavior. We may achieve 
prevention by using antecedent-based 
strategies. Second, the search for effective 
antecedent-based strategies can improve 
our understanding of the learner’s 
experiences. For example, suppose a 
learner tantrums when transitioning from 
one teacher to another. We observe the 
teachers’ styles to identify any possible 
differences that would predict tantrum. 
It is noted that the learner behaves more 
appropriately for the teacher who speaks 
at a slower pace. The other teacher then 
speaks slowly and the learner’s tantrums 
stop. While not all assessment and 
intervention plans will go so smoothly, 
this example illustrates that antecedent-
intervention can be more desirable 
than consequence-based intervention Antecedent-Based Interventions
for some situations. Third, a thorough 
assessment of the context can lead to 
endless possibilities for intervention. 
Possibilities include offering choices in 
the types, number, and order of tasks; 
altering the demand by reducing the effort 
required; mixing easy and hard tasks; 
reducing distractions; increasing visual 
supports; and incorporating the student’s 
preferences.
Joey often throws his worksheet 
halfway through his assignment. 
His teacher is perplexed, 
especially since he can do the 
work. One day, she notices 
that there is no problem when 
a ﬁre drill interrupts them 
halfway through the period. 
Later that day, Joey ﬁnishes 
the worksheet without incident. 
The teacher decides ask Joey 
to do just a few problems on 
the worksheet. She gives him a 
choice of other activities. Later 
in the day, he completes the 
worksheet.  Breaking the task 
up reduces the monotony and 
increases Joey’s cooperation. In 
the future, the teacher will work 
on maintaining Joey’s motivation 
while slowly increasing the 
amount of work she expects.Example 1
ABA Principles & Methods 39Example 3
While antecedent-based interventions are 
crucial to preventing challenging behavior, 
these strategies can also be helpful when 
teaching new skills. 
Danny, a teenager with autism, 
was not able to tell the difference 
between the men’s and women’s 
restroom signs. His father tried 
to teach him this by typing the 
relevant words and printing 
them in a large font. After a 
week of instruction, his father 
realized that Danny was not 
independently identifying these 
two signs. He still needed 
his father’s help. His father 
incorporated an antecedent-
based strategy: he changed the 
teaching materials. This time, 
his father used stick ﬁgure 
drawings commonly used on 
restroom doors to depict a 
man and a woman. With a few 
days of teaching, Danny could 
independently identify these 
signs.Antecedent-Based Interventions
Prior to her teachers using an 
antecedent-based strategy, 
Melissa screams when she is 
randomly paired with Barbara 
(another student) to complete 
a task. Melissa verbally and 
physically protests throughout 
the task. Barbara does not like 
listening to Melissa scream. 
Barbara says to the teacher, 
“Maybe you should let her pick 
her own partner next time.” 
The teacher does just that. 
The next time Melissa does 
not protest! The incorporation 
of choice-making improves 
Melissa’s behavior and avoids a 
problematic scene.Example 2
Resources
Glasberg, B. A. (2008). Stop that 
seemingly senseless behavior! FBA-
based interventions for people with 
autism. Bethesda, MD: Woodbine 
House. 
Luiselli, J. K., & Cameron, M. J. 
(1998). Antecedent control: Innovative 
approaches to behavioral support. 
Baltimore, MD: Brookes Publishing.
ABA Principles & Methods 40meaningful goals are developed for the 
individual, to put the individual in more 
contact with people and experiences they 
ﬁnd rewarding, and that increase the 
positive aspects of their relationships.
Comprehensive multi-component 
interventions are another feature of PBS 
plans.  They program for success by 
addressing many related issues and skills.  
Someone who is having difﬁculty with 
completing assigned work might have 
components of a plan that include asking 
for a break, assistance with difﬁcult tasks, 
choosing the order and location of tasks, 
interspersing solitary work and social 
time, and responding appropriately to 
feedback on performance. 
PBS often inspires people to make small, 
yet creative and important, shifts in 
various aspects of teaching.  Perhaps a 
person will learn more effectively if given 
a peer buddy or allowed to take breaks 
from work to go outdoors several times 
throughout the day.  Sometimes, a team 
can generate some strategic changes 
in scheduling, locations, roles, or staff 
assignments to maximize the success 
and happiness of the individual with 
autism. The combination of individual and 
systems change can produce effective, 
durable, and meaningful outcomes for all 
involved.
There is considerable overlap between 
ABA and PBS. Virtually all applied 
behavior analysts agree with the social 
values emphasized in PBS. Similarly, 
proponents of PBS rely heavily on ABA 
methods and research design to improve When a person with a disability is 
aggressive or self-injurious, it is dangerous 
for the person and those around him or 
her. Planning and careful responding are 
required to safely and effectively reduce 
the dangerous behavior. Fortunately, 
there are many things a team can do 
to 1) understand why the behavior is 
happening, 2) teach the individual how to 
act more appropriately, and 3) improve the 
individual’s quality of life. Positive Behavior 
Support (PBS) accomplishes these three 
things by combining well-researched 
assessment and intervention strategies 
of ABA with the social values of personal 
choice, independence, community 
integration, systems change, and quality 
of life.
Quality of life is embedded into PBS.  It 
incorporates person-centered planning 
in all possible aspects of intervention and 
is focused on the individual and on his 
or her quality of life. The individual with 
autism is included in the intervention 
planning process.  Preferences are taken 
into account in a variety of ways, including 
tasks to work on and leisure pursuits.  
Choice is of central importance, and every 
element of programming is sensitive to 
the inclusion of choice wherever possible. 
PBS also includes all stakeholders in 
the process by incorporating their input 
into the development of a plan.  Parents’ 
input is actively solicited and used to 
make an appropriate plan that can 
easily be implemented at home and in 
the community. Whenever possible, the 
individual with autism has a voice in the 
development of goals and plans. Socially Positive Behavior Support
ABA Principles & Methods 41Positive Behavior Support
Resources
Carr, E. G., Dunlap, G., Horner, R. 
H., Koegel, R. L., Turnbull, A. P., 
Sailor, W., Anderson, J. L., Albin, R. 
W., Koegel, L. K., & Fox, L. (2002). 
Positive behavior support: Evolution of 
an applied science. Journal of Positive 
Behavior Interventions, 4, 4-16.
Jackson, L., & Panyan, M. V. (2002). 
Positive behavioral support in the 
classroom: Principles and practices. 
Baltimore, MD:  Brookes Publishing.
Koegel, L. K., Koegel, R. L., & Dunlap, 
G. (1996). Positive behavioral support: 
Including people with difﬁcult behavior 
in the community. Baltimore, MD: 
Brookes Publishing.
Lucyshyn, J. M., Dunlap, G., & Albin, 
R. W. (2002). Families and positive 
behavior support: Addressing problem 
behavior in family contexts. Baltimore, 
MD: Brookes Publishing.their methods. There is some debate in 
the ﬁeld regarding the nature of PBS as 
separate from ABA or as an outgrowth of 
ABA. For our purposes in this manual, 
PBS is a well-researched methodology 
that provides effective and comprehensive 
measures to help individuals with 
challenging behavior and those around 
them.
 
ABA Principles & Methods 42When teaching learners with autism, we 
have to plan for generalization to occur. One 
way to convey that is to say, ‘We cannot just 
teach and hope.’ While teaching a new skill 
is certainly the ﬁrst step, there are likely 
to be many more steps in teaching when 
to do the skill, when not to, and how to 
behave just right in a particular situation. 
The learning process is not complete until 
widespread generalization has occurred in 
meaningful situations.Generalization
Generalization occurs when a person 
learns something in one environment and 
can independently apply it in another. 
Spontaneous generalization occurs when 
the learner can do so without any additional 
training. Learners with autism often have 
a difﬁcult time generalizing skills to new 
environments. They may need more 
intensive teaching to learn how to exhibit 
new skills outside of the teaching situation. 
While it may be important to teach new 
skills in a controlled manner, it is also 
important to make sure that the person can 
use the skill in a functional and meaningful 
way.
There are three main types of 
generalization. Stimulus generalization 
means that the learner can respond the 
same way with different cues in place. 
For example, drivers stop at red lights 
and stop signs. When a driver stops for a 
policeman directing trafﬁc, the driver has 
demonstrated stimulus generalization. The 
driver had the same response even though 
the cue (stimulus) was different. Response 
generalization means that a learner exhibits 
different responses in the same situations. 
For example, a teacher says good morning 
to her student. On Monday, the student 
responds with a wave. On Tuesday, the 
student acknowledges the teacher’s greeting 
with eye contact and a smile. The student 
exhibited a different response even though 
the situation was the same.  The third type 
of generalization is generalization over time, 
also known as maintenance.  This  refers 
to the ability to demonstrate skills long after 
responses are no longer reinforced as they 
were in the training setting.  Generalization 
and maintenance refer to the learner’s 
performance for both skill acquisition and 
behavior reduction goals.Stimulus Generalization
1. The mailman greets the child, 
saying, “Hi.  How are you?” 
2. The child says, “Fine.”  This 
skill has only been taught in 
Discrete Trial Instruction at  
school.
3. You have taught the child to 
ask, “Can I have a turn?” when 
others have highly preferred 
toys at home.  At a family 
gathering at his aunt’s house, 
he asks a cousin, “Can I have 
a turn?”
ABA Principles & Methods 43Generalization
Resources
  
Maintenance
6. Six months ago, Joey learned 
to identify the letters of the 
alphabet.  On many occasions 
throughout the week, he 
demonstrates this skill in 
natural contexts. He may label 
letters in an alphabet puzzle, 
letters in his name on a 
bulletin board, letters in signs 
in the community, etc.
7. Jennifer learned how to 
use the toilet in the month 
of June. Her parents and 
teachers still collect data 
during July, August, and 
September to see if she 
maintains her toileting skills 
over time.Response Generalization
4. Repetitive video rewinding has 
been targeted for reduction.  
This has been successful.  
Parents report that the 
tendency to increase the 
volume when watching tapes 
has also declined.
5. Through DTI, you have taught 
the child to request, “I want 
banana.” when presented 
with a choice of snacks. (You 
start off with banana because 
the child seems to really like 
bananas.) The child also 
begins spontaneously saying, 
“I want raisins.”
Baer, D. M. (1998). How to plan for 
generalization (2nd ed.). Austin, TX: 
PRO-ED.
Koegel, L. K., Koegel, R. L., & Parks, 
D. R. (1992). How to teach self-
management to people with severe 
disabilities:  A training manual. Santa 
Barbara, CA: University of California.
Available at http://www.education.ucsb.
edu/autism/behaviormanuals.html
Stokes, T. F., & Baer, D. M. (1977). An 
implicit technology of generalization. 
Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 
10, 349-367.
 
ABA Principles & Methods 44Evaluation of 
ABA Programs
Data Collection and Analysis
Data are collected within an ABA program for 
multiple purposes. Data inform the decisions 
we make about programming.  Data are 
taken to document both the acquisition of 
skills and the improvement in challenging 
behaviors. Here are some of the most 
common ways to collect data.
Frequency
How often, for example, the number of times 
a learner requests a toy: ﬁve times
Rate
How often within a certain amount of time. 
For example, the number of times a learner 
requests a toy within a twenty -minute class 
period - ﬁve times in twenty minutes equals 
0.25 times per minute. One advantage of 
converting frequency to rate is that you can 
take data for different amounts of time and 
still be able to evenly compare the number of 
times a behavior occurred.Duration
How long. For example, the length of time 
that a preschooler sits appropriately during 
circle time - three minutes.
Intensity
How severe. For example, a tantrum could 
range from mild to severe.
As one might imagine, there are some 
behaviors that are better tracked by one 
method than another. For advantages and 
disadvantages for each type data, please 
see the resource section below.
Data analysis involves graphing the data 
and analyzing the following elements:
Level (How much is the behavior 
happening?).
Trend (Is the behavior increasing, 
decreasing, or maintaining?).
45Stability (Are the behaviors [data points] 
close together or highly variable?).
The level, trend, stability, and other 
information about the behavior are then 
used to make decisions about appropriate 
interventions and goals for performance.
Before an intervention begins, behavior 
analysts collect information about the 
behavior. This is called baseline data.  
Baseline data are collected on both 
challenging behaviors and targeted skills. 
Data are then collected during the course of 
an intervention to determine if the learner is 
making progress, how much progress, and 
if modiﬁcations to the intervention plan are 
necessary.
One hallmark characteristic of ABA is 
ongoing data collection. While you can 
take data every time a behavior occurs, 
it is not necessary to do so. There are 
many efﬁcient and reliable means of 
collecting “probe” (occasional) data that 
do not require continuous “trial by trial” data recording. One goal is to collect as 
much data as possible without detracting 
from the teaching interaction. These data 
are important when making decisions 
about what and how to teach. Data guide 
instructors on a constant basis. 
Demonstration of a functional 
relation
Another hallmark characteristic of ABA is 
the demonstration of a systematic relation 
between two variables. For example, if a 
learner had a tantrum when and only when 
there was a change in the class schedule, 
one might suspect the schedule change 
caused the tantrum. A behavior analyst 
would explore this possible connection to 
determine if these events simply occurred 
together in time or if one caused the 
other. Behavior analysts identify relations 
between variables and use this information 
to change the environment and behavior in 
the most positive and efﬁcient way possible.
Evaluation of ABA Programs 46Running an 
Intensive ABA Program
ABA intervention is a complex and 
multi-faceted endeavor.  A good ABA 
program is intensive, individualized, and 
comprehensive.
Intensive
A good ABA program provides intensive 
teaching.  Intensity usually means a low 
teacher to student ratio (one teacher for 
one or two students), a large number of 
instructional hours, and many learning 
opportunities. People often ask, “How many 
hours?” Most experts recommend 30 to 
40 hours. (Recall that naturalistic teaching 
done throughout activities can be counted 
as hours if there is a systematic focus on 
the development of skills at these times.) 
Individualized
A good ABA program will be highly 
individualized. It will not be a cookbook 
or one-size-ﬁts-all approach. The foundation of individualization is the 
assessment process. Initially, a thorough 
and comprehensive assessment is done 
to help understand the learner’s areas of 
strengths and deﬁcits. The assessment 
itself will be individualized in terms of 
the types of instruments used and tested 
skills. A good assessment offers critical 
information to answer the question: Where 
should we start teaching? During the course 
of an intervention, a learner’s progress is 
analyzed in order to support him/her in the 
most positive and effective ways possible. 
Children with autism are quite different 
from one another; their programs should 
reﬂect this diversity.
Comprehensive
A good ABA program will incorporate 
several of the instructional methods that 
comprise ABA.  For example, a program 
that only utilizes DTI will not allow enough 
47opportunities for spontaneity. Since 
different instructional methods have distinct 
advantages, there are reasons to use 
multiple methods of instruction to ensure 
that a wide range of skills are taught.
Who can put together a comprehensive 
ABA program?  Credentialed professionals 
in Applied Behavior Analysis are in the best 
position to provide comprehensive ABA 
services. The Autism Special Interest Group 
of the Association for Behavior Analysis 
International (ABAI) provides consumers 
with guidelines that can be used to learn 
more about professional competencies 
in ABA. There are also other resources 
available to help make this important 
decision (see to the left).
Running an Intensive ABA Program 48Resources
The Autism Special Interest Group 
of the Association for Behavior 
Analysis International (ABAI). (2007). 
Consumer guidelines for identifying, 
selecting, and evaluating behavior 
analysts working with individuals with 
autism spectrum disorders. Available 
at http://www.abainternational.org/
Special_Interests/AutGuidelines.pdf. 
Harris, S. L., & Weiss, M. J. (2007). 
Right from the start: Behavioral 
intervention for young children with 
autism (2nd ed.). Bethesda, MD: 
Woodbine House.
Leaf, R., McEachin, J., & Harsh, J. 
D. (Eds.). (1999). A work in progress: 
Behavior management strategies & 
a curriculum for intensive behavioral 
treatment of autism. New York, NY: 
DRL Books.
Maurice, C., Green, G., & Foxx, R. M. 
(Eds.).  (2001). Making a difference: 
Behavioral intervention for autism.  
Austin, TX: PRO-ED.
Maurice, C (Ed.)., Green, G., & Luce, 
S. C. (Co-eds.). (1996). Behavioral 
intervention for young children with 
autism: A manual for parents and 
professionals. Austin, 
TX: PRO-ED.
Sundberg, M. L., & Partington, J. W. 
(1998). Teaching language to children 
with autism or other developmental 
disabilities. Pleasant Hill, CA: Behavior 
Analysts, Inc.ABA and the Family
As parents, we teach our children everyday. 
However, given the neurological limitations 
that autism imposes, parents may need 
additional skills to effectively teach their 
children. ABA methods offer many 
strategies for assessment and intervention. 
It is recommended that parents learn 
as much as they can about ABA. While 
increasing your “ABA repertoire” will 
beneﬁt your child and your family, each 
parent has to decide how much they 
want to know and do. One parent may be 
comfortable knowing the basic terminology 
and a few skills to follow up on what the 
child is learning in school. Another parent 
may read volumes of literature and “live 
and breathe” ABA. Other parents may fall somewhere in between by having a good 
understanding of ABA, working with the 
school on speciﬁc skills, and implementing 
consistent ABA strategies at home to 
reinforce appropriate behavior throughout 
the day.
For those parents who want to learn ABA 
methods, we recommend starting with the 
following: reinforcement, shaping, and 
mand training (in the Natural Environment 
Training section). These strategies are 
likely to increase your child’s appropriate 
behavior and motivation.
See resources on the next page.
49ABA and the Family 50Parents’ perspectives on ABA are 
available from the following resources:
Bondy, A. S., & Frost, L. A. (2008). 
Autism 24/7: A family guide to learning 
at home and in the community. 
Bethesda, MD: Woodbine House. 
Braxton, E. (1996). Peter’s story. In C. 
Maurice (Ed.), G. Green, & S. C. Luce 
(Co-eds.). Behavioral intervention for 
young children with autism: A manual 
for parents and professionals. (pp.377-
382). Austin, TX: PRO-ED.
Harrington, E. (1996), Rebecca’s story. 
In C. Maurice (Ed.), G. Green, & S. C. 
Luce (Co-eds.). Behavioral intervention 
for young children with autism: A 
manual for parents and professionals. 
(pp.365-372). Austin, TX: PRO-ED.
Harris, M. (1996). In search of 
Michael. In C. Maurice (Ed.), G. Green, 
& S. C. Luce (Co-eds.). Behavioral 
intervention for young children with 
autism: A manual for parents and 
professionals. (pp.359-364). Austin, 
TX: PRO-ED.
Kleinﬁeld-Hayes, C. (1996). Brandon’s 
journey. In C. Maurice (Ed.), G. Green, 
& S. C. Luce (Co-eds.).  Behavioral 
intervention for young children with 
autism: A manual for parents and 
professionals. (pp.373-376). Austin, 
TX: PRO-ED.
Maurice, C. (1994). Let me hear your 
voice: A family’s triumph over autism. 
New York, NY: Ballantine Books.
Richman, S. (2000). Raising a child 
with autism: A guide to applied 
behavior analysis for parents. London: 
Jessica Kingsley Publishers. ResourcesChildren with autism present special 
challenges and opportunities for their 
siblings. These resources offer great 
suggestions on how to include siblings in 
ABA programming, decrease sibling rivalry, 
and help siblings make the most of their 
relationship.
Feiges, L. S., & Weiss, M. J. (2004). Siblings
ABA and the Family 51Resources
Resources
Autism New Jersey. (2010). Kids 
booklet on autism. Robbinsville, NJ: 
Author. Available at www.autismnj.org.
 
Feiges, L. S., & Weiss, M. J. (2004). 
Sibling stories: Reﬂections on life 
with a brother or sister on the autism 
spectrum. Shawnee Mission, Kansas: 
Autism Asperger Publishing.
Harris, S. L., & Glasberg, B. A. (2003). 
Siblings of children with autism: A 
guide for families (2nd ed.). Bethesda, 
MD: Woodbine House.
Luce, S. C., & Dyer, K. (1996). 
Answers to commonly asked 
questions. In C. Maurice, (Ed.), 
G. Green, & S.C. Luce (Co-eds.). 
Behavioral intervention for young 
children with autism: A manual for 
parents and professionals (pp. 345-
356). Austin, TX: PRO-ED. 
Meyer, D., J., & Vadasy, P. F. (1994). 
Sibshops: Workshops for siblings 
of children with special needs. 
Baltimore, MD: Brookes Publishing.This section addresses administrative 
issues.
As previously noted, intensive programs 
for learners with autism can be intense 
experiences for those who are responsible 
for them. This section highlights some of 
the common issues parents face when 
maintaining a home program. There are 
some advantages and disadvantages to 
having a child’s education take place 
at home. The issues presented will be 
helpful in determining if a home program is 
appropriate for an individual family.
When a child goes to school, there is a 
natural separation of home and school life. 
The teacher does not enter the home, or at 
least not on a regular basis. A home-based 
program presents very differently. Teaching 
is taking place where the child and family 
live.  If a difﬁcult discussion needs to take 
place with the teacher, it may happen in 
the living room or at the kitchen table.  The 
natural separation of home and school that 
is inherent in sending a child to a school 
evaporates.  Everything happens at home. 
Alternatively, this could be seen as a good 
thing. Communication may be more regular 
and thorough, and it may not require a 
scheduled meeting.
From the child’s perspective, there are 
learning opportunities throughout the day. 
For young children, this learning would 
occur in the most natural setting – his/her 
home. The child has plenty of opportunities 
to learn, use, and generalize new skills in 
a functional manner across people and 
settings. Frequently in the home program, 
opportunities for social development require 
more planning than in a school. Arranging 
play dates can take on a new meaning when the child has beginner-level play and 
social skills.  
There are also factors to consider 
related to the staff of the program. The 
home environment may cause some 
professionals to behave more casually 
than they would in a classroom. This 
puts some parents at ease, while others 
ﬁnd it unprofessional. Parents should 
be aware of their preferences and make 
them known to their child’s instructors. 
Perhaps these expectations should be 
included in their performance appraisals. 
The Autism Special Interest Group of the 
Association for Behavior Analysis has 
created guidelines for consumers of ABA 
services. This document may be helpful in 
selecting behavior analysts and reviewing 
their performance with standard criteria 
in mind. The information gathered from 
both informal and formal sources can be 
used in a systematic way to determine 
the feedback, incentives, and raises that 
are provided for the child’s instructors. 
Some parents welcome this opportunity 
and are very comfortable in the role of 
employer. Others rise to the occasion with 
mixed feelings along the way. The program 
supervisor can largely determine the quality 
of the home program. He/she sets the 
tone for professionalism, communication, 
collaboration, and the integrity of the ABA 
program itself. Service delivery coordination 
and ﬁnancial arrangements with state early 
intervention programs, local school districts, 
and state ofﬁces for individuals with 
developmental disabilities are substantial 
tasks that are beyond the scope of this 
book.
There are also implications for siblings 
when a home-based program is in effect.  
ABA and the Family 52Running a Home-based ABA ProgramMany siblings enjoy the presence of 
another caring and fun adult. However, 
it is also common for siblings to become 
jealous of their brother or sister’s “special 
friend.”  Often, a sibling’s perspective can 
be improved by giving them a comfortable 
role (participating in turn taking or a circle 
time activity). Letting siblings see what 
happens with the instructor can go a long 
way to increase their comfort level and 
reduce negative feelings. Of course, a 
sibling’s participation should be entirely 
voluntary.  Parents and instructors should 
take their lead from the sibling and create 
an experience tailored to his or her level of 
interest and concerns.
Running a home-based instructional 
program is an enormous undertaking.  
Parents assume central roles not just in 
the instruction of their child, but also in the 
management of an educational team. 
ABA and the Family 51Running a Home-based ABA ProgramABA as a 
Profession
We have provided a lot of information in this 
book. Yet, this is only a fraction of the ABA 
knowledge base. Professionals in this ﬁeld are 
responsible for knowing how to successfully 
implement a wide range of assessment, 
intervention, and quality assurance methods. 
To do so requires extensive training including 
academic coursework, hands-on experience, 
and supervision. A national certiﬁcation is 
well underway to ensure a minimum level of 
competence for those who practice ABA. This 
certiﬁcation became available on a national 
level in 1999 and is a major advancement 
for the profession and for consumers of ABA 
services. The criteria for this certiﬁcation offer 
guidelines for consumers when choosing a 
behavior analyst.
The following resources offer many speciﬁc 
qualiﬁcations for behavior analysts and those they supervise.  A few basic skills are 
worthy of mention in this overview of ABA to 
foster your identiﬁcation of the major areas 
of competence within behavior analysis.
A behavior analyst should:
1. Spend time with the learner and those 
who play a role in his educational 
programming (parents, teachers, etc.) 
in order to gain an appreciation of the 
learner’s preferences and skills and the 
team’s values and goals.
2. Observe the learner on multiple 
occasions to become familiar with what 
the learner can do with and without 
intervention.
3. Conduct objective assessments that 
capture a true picture of the behavior.
554. Implement (or train others to implement) 
an intervention that is acceptable to 
the team, individualized for the learner, 
increases appropriate behavior, and 
makes a meaningful difference in the 
learner’s life.
5. Collect and analyze data to be able to 
describe the learner’s progress and to 
ensure service accountability.
6. Overall, act in accordance with the 
Behavior Analyst Certiﬁcation Board® 
(BACB) Professional Disciplinary 
Standards® and Guidelines for 
Responsible Conduct for Behavior 
Analysts®.
The skills noted in numbers 1-5 above are 
basic level skills. Good behavior analysts 
practice within the conduct guidelines 
mentioned in number 6. Please refer to these 
guidelines to become familiar with ABA’s 
professional expectations and standards.
While many qualiﬁed behavior analysts serve 
learners with autism, the demand for ABA 
services far exceeds the supply. Given this 
low supply and high demand state, many 
under-qualiﬁed or unqualiﬁed providers are 
well positioned to offer their services. It is 
important to mention that all professionals 
who utilize ABA methods should comply with 
the standards of the profession. For example, 
many people who provide “ABA services” 
only know how to use a particular curriculum 
or training protocol. This professional should 
provide that information to the consumer by 
detailing his/her training experiences and by 
referring to another professional for services 
beyond that topic. This professional should 
not assume that one particular curriculum 
or treatment protocol is appropriate for all 
learners nor withhold information about 
more comprehensive programs. For 
more information on the Behavior Analyst 
Certiﬁcation Board (BACB), please visit their 
web site: www.bacb.com.
ABA as a Profession 56Resources
The Autism Special Interest Group 
of the Association for Behavior 
Analysis International (ABAI). (2007). 
Consumer guidelines for identifying, 
selecting, and evaluating behavior 
analysts working with individuals with 
autism spectrum disorders. Available 
at http://www.abainternational.org/
Special_Interests/AutGuidelines.pdf.
Behavior Analyst Certiﬁcation Board 
(BACB) (www.bacb.com) Sections 
for consumers and professionals 
regarding eligibility requirements, 
examination content, and professional 
conduct guidelines.
Scott, J. (1996). Recruiting, selecting, 
and training teaching assistants. In C. 
Maurice, (Ed.), G. Green, & S. C. Luce. 
(Co-eds.). Behavioral intervention for 
young children with autism: A manual 
for parents and professionals (pp. 231-
240). Austin, TX: PRO-ED. 
Shook, G. L., & Favell, J. E. (1996). 
Identifying qualiﬁed professionals in 
behavior analysis. In C. Maurice (Ed.), 
G. Green, & S. C. Luce. (Co-eds.). 
Behavioral intervention for young 
children with autism: A manual for 
parents and professionals (pp. 221-
229). Austin, TX: PRO-ED.Myths & Facts
Top Ten Misconceptions of ABA
 
To complete this overview of ABA, it may 
be helpful to review some of the popular 
misconceptions about what ABA is and is 
not. Often an approach can be minimized, 
discounted, or incorrectly described 
by people with minimal information or 
misinformation. When this happens, 
people can get the wrong idea about what 
an approach represents, how effective an 
approach is, who an approach is appropriate 
for, etc. ABA has been subject to many 
misconceptions for a variety of reasons. 
Below are some of the misconceptions that 
parents and professionals are most likely to 
hold about ABA.
MYTH
ABA is a one-size-ﬁts-all approach.FACT
ABA is highly individualized in every way 
Behavior analysts begin by assessing an 
individual’s skills and develop learning 
objectives. From the goals selected to 
the methods used, ABA is focused on 
maximizing an individual’s performance. 
By observing a person’s behavior and 
collecting objective data, behavior analysts 
are able to monitor progress and adjust 
interventions on a daily basis. ABA teaching 
is a very dynamic process.
MYTH
ABA increases compliance and some other 
skills but does not address “higher-level” 
skills such as play and social skills.
57FACT
ABA can be used to build skills in all areas, 
including abstract thought and social skills. 
Common objectives include reciprocal 
conversation, joining a game, and problem-
solving skills.
MYTH
ABA results in similar outcomes for all 
individuals with autism.
FACT
Autism is a neurobiological disorder that 
is evident in a person’s behavior. ABA can 
signiﬁcantly impact a person’s behavior 
by teaching him new skills, sometimes 
to the extent that he can become 
indistinguishable from his peers. For the 
majority of individuals with autism who do 
not “recover,” they do make substantial 
progress throughout their lives as a result of 
ABA.
MYTH
There is evidence that other approaches 
are just as effective as ABA. 
FACT
According to the information available at 
this time, ABA is the only approach with 
substantial, documented evidence of its 
effectiveness for learners with autism. 
Behavior analysts have conducted 
systematic research and provided 
documented, peer-reviewed evidence of 
its effectiveness for thousands of people. 
In addition, the documentation of ABA’s 
effectiveness covers many types of 
interventions, age groups, and skill levels. 
The proponents of other approaches have 
limited or no objective data to demonstrate 
improvement for learners with autism. MYTH
An intensive ABA program is a guarantee 
that a child will be able to enter 
kindergarten without supports.
FACT
There is a range of outcomes for learners in 
intensive ABA intervention. Some children 
enter into inclusive settings part-time and 
still receive some specialized instruction in 
another setting. Some children continue 
to need specialized and intensive services 
in a full day program. Other children enter 
into full-time kindergarten settings, but 
require supports such as a shadow (an 
instructional assistant assigned just to them 
or to several children with special needs) or 
a speech therapist. And some children do 
attend full-time regular education without 
supports. Most importantly, while it may be 
tempting to equate a child’s educational 
placement with success or failure, it often 
is more meaningful to look at a child’s 
progress on multiple dimensions.
MYTH
Intensive ABA is no longer justiﬁed when 
children are past pre-school age.
FACT
ABA has received tremendous recognition 
for the impact at the pre-school level.  
However, it remains the best documented 
and effective approach for older learners 
as well.  This is so because it is a science 
based on the principles of human behavior, 
which span all age and ability ranges.
MYTH
ABA consists mostly of compliance training, 
resulting in children who are resistant to 
Myths & Facts 58learning and tantrum to escape learning 
situations.
FACT
Historically, compliance training was used 
a great deal in ABA. We now know much 
more about how to motivate behavior, and 
compliance is gained in many positive 
ways. In a good ABA program, children 
are very fond of their instructors, eagerly 
anticipate learning, and enjoy their 
instructional time.
MYTH
ABA uses a lot of punishment.
FACT
This is a very serious issue and will be 
answered in two parts.
a. Punishment is NEVER used as part 
of a teaching program. ABA always 
uses items and activities that motivate 
learners to participate in instruction. 
Increasing appropriate behavior is the 
major focus of all ABA programs.
b. When an individual exhibits challenging 
behaviors that place the individual or 
others in danger, a treatment team 
must carefully and effectively respond 
to reduce the behavior. Comprehensive 
positive behavioral supports (see 
page 41) should be utilized to the 
fullest extent to reduce dangerous 
behavior through assessment and 
positive interventions. Most of the time, 
positive approaches sufﬁciently reduce 
the dangerous behavior. The use of 
punishment procedures is a last resort. 
Most punishment procedures are 
consistent with techniques that parents 
use with typically developing children 
such as verbal reprimands and loss of 
59 Myths & Factsprivileges. If punishment procedures 
are used, they should be done so very 
cautiously, with full consent of parents, 
and with procedural safeguards to 
ensure beneﬁt to the individual. Using 
behavior reduction procedures without 
informed consent and documented 
effectiveness is unacceptable. All 
parents should ﬁnd out how their child’s 
behavior is addressed and discuss the 
procedures for which you would and 
would not provide consent. For more 
information on guidelines for the use of 
behavior reduction procedures, please 
see Autism New Jersey’s Position 
Statement on the Use of Restrictive 
Procedures within Comprehensive 
Behavior Support Plans (see resource 
section). This position statement 
advocates for the extinction or limited 
use of punishment procedures. 
It outlines extensive procedural 
safeguards for the safe and effective 
use of punishment procedures within 
the contexts of behavior plans and crisis 
management, should they be deemed 
necessary by a treatment team. While 
clinicians and legislators continue to 
discuss the merits of regulating such 
procedures as a component of a plan 
or crisis management, the individual’s 
rights and safety are primary concerns.
MYTH
ABA is limited to one or a few speciﬁc 
strategies, such as Discrete Trial 
Instruction.
FACT
ABA incorporates many strategies to 
improve people’s abilities and quality 
of life. Sometimes these strategies are 
grouped together by practitioners and Resourcesgiven a speciﬁc name. On a similar note, 
the procedures used at particular schools 
are sometimes labeled the same name as 
the school. Given society’s tendency to put 
things into categories, it is important to 
keep in mind that every learner with autism 
requires an individualized educational 
plan. Behavior analysts should use their 
knowledge and experience to create and 
monitor such a plan. Doing so may require 
using a combination of strategies that have 
research support. You should proceed with 
caution with any professional who knows 
only one set of strategies or “brand” of 
ABA.
MYTH
All professionals are created equal and all 
explain ABA in the same way.
FACT
All professionals do not receive equivalent 
training. In fact, there is some variability 
in the training of behavior analysts and 
even greater variability in the training of 
behavioral “consultants.” Be wary of taking 
one professional’s perspective. Obtain a 
second opinion, if necessary. In terms of 
using the same terminology, many behavior 
analysts do. However, there are many 
examples of similar strategies with different 
names and slightly different components. 
Hopefully, this book will make these 
similarities and differences more clear. (For 
more information on the qualiﬁcations and 
credentialing of behavior analysts, please 
see chapter 10.)
ABA as a Profession 60Association of Professional Behavior 
Analysts. (2009). The use of restraint 
and seclusion as interventions for 
dangerous and destructive behaviors. 
Available at 
www.apbahome.net.
Autism New Jersey. (2010). Position 
statement on the use of restrictive 
procedures within comperhensive 
behavior support plans. Robbinsville, 
NJ: Author. Available at 
www.autismnj.org.Summary
ABA is a powerful teaching technology 
for learners with autism.  During the past 
several decades, it has become more 
sophisticated and more complex. There are 
a wide variety of instructional strategies, 
each of which has a distinct purpose and 
unique advantages.  A comprehensive ABA 
program addresses the range of deﬁcits 
that learners exhibit and utilizes a wide 
array of these instructional strategies. All 
of the strategies discussed in this book are 
compatible and can be included together in 
a comprehensive intervention package.
What makes it ABA?
Regardless of which instructional strategy 
is being used, the following elements 
characterize an ABA program.
1. Assessment: Behavior analysts conduct 
a thorough initial assessment and 
continual assessment of behavior change over time. Assessment is the 
ﬁrst step in every ABA endeavor and 
remains a constant presence in every 
program. Assessment is not a one-shot 
deal but instead a regular feature in the 
ABA process.
2. A link between assessment and 
intervention: Intervention is guided by 
assessment and is individualized to the 
learner’s unique needs.
3. Data-based decision making: Data are 
collected and analyzed to evaluate 
how a learner is doing on a particular 
program. Decisions about what to do 
next are determined by rate of progress 
and other objective indicators of 
progress, not on someone’s impression 
or pre-determined criteria.
4. Dynamic and responsive programming: 
The constant data collection 
and analysis allows for dynamic 
programming. Learners should not 
61be distressed, fail to attain skills, or 
exhibit increasing rates of challenging 
behaviors.  Such problems signal to 
the behavior analyst that a change in 
instruction is warranted.
5. Social signiﬁcance: The issues 
addressed should be socially 
signiﬁcant; they should make real 
differences in the lives of people served 
and should increase their access to 
rewarding activities. At its core, ABA 
is focused on helping people make 
meaningful progress.What is the message?
The goal of ABA intervention is to 
build socially signiﬁcant behaviors in 
a meaningful way and to a meaningful 
degree. The broad array of ABA 
interventions helps us accomplish this 
important goal. Generalization and 
spontaneity are essential components of 
successful intervention.  The ultimate goal 
is the demonstration of skills in natural 
contexts leading to richer personal and 
social experiences.  
 
Summary 62While not an exhaustive list, the following 
journals are well-regarded sources of ABA 
information. Publication in these journals 
involves a process known as peer review in 
which a study is evaluated, critiqued, and 
eventually determined to be scientiﬁcally and 
clinical valuable by a group of experts.
tAnalysis and Intervention in 
Developmental Disabilities
tAnalysis of Verbal Behavior
tAutism
tBehavioral Interventions
tBehavior Therapy
tChild and Family Behavior Therapy
tFocus on Autism and Developmental 
DisorderstJournal of Applied Behavior 
Analysis
tJournal of the American Academy 
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
tJournal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders
tJournal of the Association for 
People with Severe Handicaps
tJournal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology
tJournal of Positive Behavior 
Interventions
tResearch in Developmental 
Disabilities
63Organizations
The Association for Behavior Analysis 
International (ABAI)
www.abainternational.org
tAutism Special Interest Group
tParent-Professional Partnership Special 
Interest Group
tState, Regional, and International 
Chapters of ABA
The Association for Science in Autism 
Treatment (ASAT)
www.asatonline.org
The Association for Positive Behavior 
Support
www.apbs.orgThe Association of Professional Behavior 
Analysts (APBA)
www.apbahome.net
Autism New Jersey 
www.autismnj.org 
Behavior Analyst Certiﬁcation Board 
(BACB)
www.bacb.com
The Cambridge Center for Behavioral 
Studies
www.behavior.org  (Autism link)
Organization for Autism Research (OAR)
www.researchautism.org
List of Peer-Reviewed JournalsResource SectionAssociation of Professional Behavior 
Analysts. (2009). The use of restraint and 
seclusion as interventions for dangerous 
and destructive behaviors. Available at 
www.apbahome.net. 
Autism New Jersey. (2010). Kids booklet on 
autism. Robbinsville, NJ: Author. Available at 
www.autismnj.org.
Autism New Jersey. (2010). Position 
statement on the use of restrictive 
procedures within comprehensive behavior 
support plans. Robbinsville, NJ: Author. 
Available at www.autismnj.org.
The Autism Special Interest Group of 
the Association for Behavior Analysis 
International (ABAI). (2007). Consumer 
guidelines for identifying, selecting, and 
evaluating behavior analysts working with 
individuals with autism spectrum disorders.  
Available at http://www.abainternational.org/
Special_Interests/AutGuidelines.pdf.
Ayllon, T. (1999). How to use token economy 
and point systems (2nd ed.). Austin, TX: 
PRO-ED.
Baer, D. M. (1998). How to plan for 
generalization (2nd ed.). Austin, TX: PRO-ED.
Baer, D. M., Wolf, M. M., & Risley, T. 
R. (1968). Some dimensions of applied 
behavior analysis. Journal of Applied 
Behavior Analysis, 1, 91-97.
Baer, D. M., Wolf, M. M., & Risley, T. R. 
(1987). Some still-current dimensions of 
applied behavior analysis. Journal of Applied 
Behavior Analysis, 20, 313-327. 
Baker, B. L., & Brightman, A. J. (2003). 
Steps to independence: Teaching everyday skills to children with special needs (4th ed.). 
Baltimore, MD: Brookes Publishing.
Barlow, D. H., & Hersen, M. (1984). Single-
case experimental designs: Strategies for 
studying behavior change (2nd ed.). New 
York, NY: Pergamon.
Binder, C. (1996). Behavioral ﬂuency: 
Evolution of a new paradigm. The Behavior 
Analyst, 19, 163-197.
Bondy, A. S., & Frost, L. A. (2008). Autism 
24/7: A family guide to learning at home and 
in the community. Bethesda, MD: Woodbine 
House. 
Bondy, A. S., & Frost, L. A. (2001). A 
picture’s worth: PECS and other visual 
communication strategies in autism. 
Bethesda, MD: Woodbine House.
Braxton, E. (1996). Peter’s story. In C. 
Maurice (Ed.), G. Green, & S. C. Luce 
(Co-eds.). Behavioral intervention for young 
children with autism: A manual for parents 
and professionals (pp.377-382). Austin, TX: 
PRO-ED.
Buggey, T. (2009). Seeing is believing: Video 
self-modeling for people with autism and 
other developmental disabilities. Bethesda, 
MD: Woodbine House. 
Carr, E. G., Dunlap, G., Horner, R. H., 
Koegel, R. L., Turnbull, A. P., Sailor, W., 
Anderson, J. L., Albin, R.W., Koegel, L. K., 
& Fox, L. (2002). Positive behavior support: 
Evolution of an applied science. Journal of 
Positive Behavior Interventions, 4, 4-16.
Celiberti, D. A., Buchanan, S. M., Bleeker, 
F. N., Kreiss, D. S., & Rosenfeld, D. (2004). 
The road less traveled: Charting a clear References
Resource Section 64course for autism treatment. Autism: 
Basic Information (5th ed., pp. 17-32). 
Robbinsville, NJ: Autism New Jersey.
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. 
(2007). Applied behavior analysis (2nd ed.). 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Delmolino, L., & Harris, S. L. (2004). 
Incentives for change: Motivating people with 
autism spectrum disorders to learn and gain 
independence. Bethesda, MD: Woodbine 
House.
Eikeseth, S., Smith, T., Jahr, E., & Eldevik, 
S. (2002). Intensive behavioral intervention 
at school for 4- to 7-year-old children with 
autism: A 1-year comparison controlled 
study. Behavior Modiﬁcation, 26, 49-68.
Fabrizio, M. (February and March, 2003). 
A parent’s introduction to ﬂuency: Parts I 
and II. The OARacle. Alexandria, VA: The 
Organization for Autism Research.
Available at http://www.researchautism.org.
Fabrizio, M. A. & Moors, A. L.  (2003).  
Evaluating mastery: Measuring instructional 
outcomes for children with autism.  European 
Journal of Behavior Analysis, 4, 23-36.
Feiges, L. S., & Weiss, M. J. (2004). 
Sibling stories: Reﬂections on life with a 
brother or sister on the autism spectrum. 
Shawnee Mission, Kansas: Autism Asperger 
Publishing.
Fenske, E. C.,  Krantz, P. J., & McClannahan, 
L. E. (2001). Incidental teaching: A not-
discrete-trial teaching procedure. In C. 
Maurice, G. Green, & R. M. Foxx. (Eds.). 
Making a difference: Behavioral intervention 
for autism (pp. 75-82). Austin, TX: PRO-ED. 
Foxx, R. M. (1982). Increasing behaviors of 
persons with severe retardation and autism. 
Champaign, IL: Research Press.Frea, W. D., Koegel, L. K., & Koegel, R. 
L. (1994). Understanding why problem 
behaviors occur:  A guide for assisting 
parents in assessing causes of behavior and 
designing treatment plans. Santa Barbara, 
CA: University of California.
Available at http://www.education.ucsb.edu/
autism/behaviormanuals.html
Glasberg, B. A. (2008). Stop that seemingly 
senseless behavior! FBA-based interventions 
for people with autism. Bethesda, MD: 
Woodbine House. 
Glasberg, B. A. (2005). Functional behavior 
assessment for people with autism: Making 
sense of seemingly senseless behavior. 
Bethesda, MD: Woodbine House. 
Green, G. (1996). Early behavioral 
intervention for autism: What does research 
tell us? In C. Maurice (Ed.), G. Green, & 
S. Luce (Co-eds.). Behavioral intervention 
for young children with autism: A manual 
for parents and professionals (pp. 29-44). 
Austin, TX: PRO-ED.
Hall, R. V., & Hall, M. L. (1998). How to 
select reinforcers (2nd ed.). Austin, TX: PRO-
ED.
Harrington, E. (1996), Rebecca’s story. In 
C. Maurice (Ed.), G. Green, & S. C. Luce 
(Co-eds.). Behavioral intervention for young 
children with autism: A manual for parents 
and professionals (pp.365-372). Austin, TX: 
PRO-ED.
Harris, M. (1996). In search of Michael. In 
C. Maurice (Ed.), G. Green, & S. C. Luce 
(Co-eds.). Behavioral intervention for young 
children with autism: A manual for parents 
and professionals (pp.359-364). Austin, TX: 
PRO-ED.
Harris, S. L., & Glasberg, B. A. (2003). 
Siblings of children with autism: A guide for 
65 Resource Sectionfamilies (2nd ed.). Bethesda, MD: Woodbine 
House.
Harris, S. L., & Weiss, M. J. (1998). Right 
from the start: Behavioral intervention for 
young children with autism. Bethesda, MD: 
Woodbine House.
Hart, B., & Risley, T. R. (1982). How to use 
incidental teaching for elaborating language.  
Lawrence, KS: H&H Enterprises. 
Howard, J. S., Sparkman, C. R., Cohen, 
H. G., Green, G., & Stainslaw, H. (2005). 
Comparison of intensive behavior analytic 
and eclectic treatments for young children 
with autism. Research in Developmental 
Disabilities, 26, 359-383.
Jackson, L., & Panyan, M. V. (2002). 
Positive behavioral support in the classroom: 
Principles and practices. Baltimore, MD: 
Brookes Publishing.
Jacobson, J. W., Mulick, J. A., & Green, 
G. (1998). Cost-beneﬁt estimates for early 
intensive behavioral intervention for young 
children with autism - general model and 
single state case. Behavioral Interventions, 
13, 201-226. 
Also available through www.behavior.org, 
click on autism link.
Kazdin, A. E. (1982). Single-case research 
designs: Methods clinical and applied 
settings. New York, NY: Oxford University 
Press, Inc.
Kleinﬁeld-Hayes, C. (1996). Brandon’s 
journey. In C. Maurice (Ed.), G. Green, & S. 
C. Luce (Co-eds.).  Behavioral intervention 
for young children with autism: A manual for 
parents and professionals. (pp.373-376). 
Austin, TX: PRO-ED.Koegel, L. K., Koegel, R. L., & Dunlap, 
G. (1996). Positive behavioral support: 
Including people with difﬁcult behavior in 
the community. Baltimore, MD: Brookes 
Publishing.
Koegel, L. K., Koegel, R. L., & Parks, D. R. 
(1992). How to teach self-management to 
people with severe disabilities:  A training 
manual. Santa Barbara, CA: University of 
California.
Available at http://www.education.ucsb.edu/
autism/behaviormanuals.html
Koegel, L. K., Koegel, R. L., Shoshan, Y., 
& McNerney, E. (1999). Pivotal response 
intervention II: Preliminary long-term 
outcomes data. Journal of the Association for 
Persons with Severe Handicaps, 24, 186-
198.
Koegel, R. L., & Koegel, L. K. (2005). 
Pivotal response treatments for autism: 
Communication, social, and academic 
development. Baltimore, MD: Brookes 
Publishing.
Koegel, R. L., & Koegel, L. K. (1995). 
Teaching children with autism: Strategies for 
initiating positive interactions and improving 
learning opportunities.  Baltimore, MD: 
Brookes Publishing.
Koegel, R. L., Schreibman, L., Good, A., 
Cerniglia, L., Murphy, C., & Koegel, L. K. 
(1989). How to teach pivotal behaviors to 
children with autism: A training manual. 
Santa Barbara, CA: University of California.
Available at http://www.education.ucsb.edu/
autism/behaviormanuals.html
Krantz, P. J., MacDuff, G. S., Wadstrom, O., 
McClannahan, L. E., Dowrick, P. W. (1991). 
Using video with developmentally disabled 
learners. In P. W. Dowrick, Practical guide to 
using video in the behavioral sciences (pp. 
256-266). Indianapolis, IN: John Wiley & 
Sons.
Resource Section 66Leaf, R., McEachin, J., & Harsh, J. D. 
(Eds.). (1999). A work in progress: Behavior 
management strategies & a curriculum for 
intensive behavioral treatment of autism. 
New York, NY: DRL Books.
Lovaas, O. I.  (2002). Teaching individuals 
with developmental delays: Basic intervention 
techniques. Austin, TX: PRO-ED.
Luce, S. C., & Dyer, K. (1996). Answers to 
commonly asked questions. In C. Maurice, 
(Ed.), G. Green, & S.C. Luce (Co-eds.). 
Behavioral intervention for young children 
with autism: A manual for parents and 
professionals (pp. 345-356). Austin, TX: 
PRO-ED. 
Lucyshyn, J. M., Dunlap, G., & Albin, R. 
W. (2002). Families and positive behavior 
support: Addressing problem behavior in 
family contexts. Baltimore, MD: Brookes 
Publishing.
Luiselli, J. K., & Cameron, M. J. (1998). 
Antecedent control: Innovative approaches to 
behavioral support. Baltimore, MD: Brookes 
Publishing.
MacDuff, G. S., Krantz, P. J., & 
McClannahan, L. E. (2001). Prompts and 
prompt-fading strategies for people with 
autism. In C. Maurice, G. Green, & R. M. 
Foxx (Eds.). Making a difference: Behavioral 
intervention for autism (pp. 37-50). Austin, 
TX: PRO-ED.
MADSEC Autism Taskforce. (1999). 
Executive summary. Portland, ME: 
Department of Education, State of Maine.
Matson, J. L., Benavidez, D. A., Compton, L. 
S., Paclawskyj, T., & Baglio, C. (1996). 
Behavioral treatment of autistic persons: A 
review of research from 1980 to the 
present. Research in Developmental 
Disabilities, 17, 433-465. 
67 Resource SectionMaurice, C. (1994). Let me hear your voice: 
A family’s triumph over autism. New York, 
NY: Ballantine Books.
Maurice, C. (Ed.), Green, G., & Luce, S. C. 
(Co-eds.). (1996). Behavioral intervention 
for young children with autism: A manual for 
parents and professionals. Austin, TX: PRO-
ED.
Maurice, C., Green, G., & Foxx, R. M. 
(2001).  Making a difference: Behavioral 
intervention for autism.  Austin, TX: PRO-ED.
McClannahan, L. E., & Krantz, P. J. (1999).  
Activity schedules for children with autism:  
Teaching independent behavior. Bethesda, 
MD: Woodbine House.
McClannahan, L. E., MacDuff, G. S., & 
Krantz, P. J. (2002). Behavior analysis and 
intervention for adults with autism. Behavior 
Modiﬁcation, 26, 9-26.
McGreevy, P. (1983). Teaching and learning 
in plain English: An introduction to precision 
teaching and precision tutoring (2nd ed.). 
Kansas City, MO: Plain English Publications.
Meyer, D. J., & Vadasy, P. F. (1994). 
Sibshops:  Workshops for siblings of children 
with special needs. Baltimore, MD:  Brookes 
Publishing.
Michael, J. (2000). Implications and 
reﬁnements of the establishing operation 
concept. Journal of Applied Behavior 
Analysis, 33, 401-410.
Miller, L. K. (1996).  Principles of everyday 
behavior analysis (3rd ed.). Paciﬁc Grove, 
CA: Brooks/Cole Publishing Company.
National Research Council. (2001). 
Educating children with autism. Committee 
on Educational Interventions for Children 
with Autism. C. Lord & J. P. McGee (Eds.) Green, & S. C. Luce (Co-eds.). Behavioral 
intervention for young children with autism: 
A manual for parents and professionals 
(pp.195-217). Austin, TX: PRO-ED.
Scott, J. (1996). Recruiting, selecting, and 
training teaching assistants. In C. Maurice, 
(Ed.), G. Green, & S. C. Luce. (Co-eds.). 
Behavioral intervention for young children 
with autism: A manual for parents and 
professionals (pp. 231-240). Austin, TX: 
PRO-ED.
Shook, G. L., & Favell, J. E. (1996). 
Identifying qualiﬁed professionals in behavior 
analysis. In C. Maurice (Ed.), G. Green, & S. 
C. Luce. (Co-eds.). Behavioral intervention 
for young children with autism: A manual for 
parents and professionals (pp. 221-229). 
Austin, TX: PRO-ED.
Skinner, B. F. (1957). Verbal behavior. East 
Norwalk, CT: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Stokes, T. F., & Baer, D. M. (1977). An 
implicit technology of generalization. Journal 
of Applied Behavior Analysis, 10, 349-367.
Striefel, S.  (1998). How to teach through 
modeling and imitation (2nd ed.).  Austin, 
TX: PRO-ED.
Sundberg, M. L., & Partington, J. W. (1998). 
Teaching language to children with autism 
or other developmental disabilities. Pleasant 
Hill, CA: Behavior Analysts, Inc.
U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services. (1999). Mental health: A report 
of the surgeon general. Rockville, MD: 
U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, Substance Abuse and Mental 
Health Services Administration, Center for 
Mental Health Services, National Institutes of 
Health, National Institute of Mental Health.
Van Houten, R. (1998). How to use prompts 
to initiate behavior. Austin, TX: PRO-ED.
Myths & Facts 68Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences 
and Education. Washington, DC: National 
Academy Press.
New York State Department of Health Early 
Intervention Program. (1999). Clinical 
practice guidelines: The guideline technical 
report – Autism/pervasive developmental 
disorders, assessment and intervention. 
Albany, NY: New York State Department of 
Health.
Newman, B. (1999). When everybody 
cares: Case studies of ABA with people with 
autism. NY: Dove and Orca.
Newman, B., Reeve, K. F., Reeve, S. A., & 
Ryan, C. S. (2003). Behaviorspeak: Glossary 
of terms in applied behavior analysis (ABA). 
NY: Dove & Orca.
Newman, B., Reinicke, D., & Newman, L. 
(2000). Words from those who care: Further 
case studies of ABA with people with autism. 
NY: Dove and Orca.
O’Neill, R. E., Horner, R. H., Albin, R. W., 
Sprague, J. R., Storey, K., and Newton, J. S.  
(1997). Functional assessment and program 
development for problem behavior: A 
practical handbook (2nd ed.). Paciﬁc Grove, 
CA: Brooks Publishing Company.
Partington, J. W., & Sundberg, M. L. (1998). 
The assessment of basic language and 
learning skills: An assessment , curriculum 
guide, and tracking system for children with 
autism or other developmental disabilities. 
Danville, CA: Behavior Analysts, Inc. 
Richman, S. (2000). Raising a child with 
autism: A guide to applied behavior analysis 
for parents. London:  Jessica Kingsley 
Publishers. 
Romanczyk, R. (1996). Behavioral analysis 
and assessment: The cornerstone to 
effectiveness. In C. Maurice (Ed.), G. We hope that Applied Behavior Analysis & Autism was useful.  Please take the time 
to complete this sheet and send it to us.  We hope to improve this book in a future 
edition.
Name
Address and phone (work or home)
Email
Questions...
1. What I like most about this book is:
2. What I like least about this book is:
3. My general reaction to this book is:
4. In the space below, or on a separate sheet of paper, please write 
speciﬁc suggestions for improving this book and anything else you would like to 
share about your experience in using the book.Give Us Your Feedback!
Autism New Jersey
Horizon Center Business Park
Building 500-Suite 530
Robbinsville, NJ  08619www.firstbridgecentre.com